This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized  
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the  
information in books and make it universally accessible.
https://books.google.com


THE
ANARCHY
O
F
A
LIMITED
OR
MIXED MONARCHY.
OR,
Afuccinct Examination ofthe Fundamentals of
Monarchy,both in this and other Kingdoms,
as well about the Right ofPowerin Kings , as ofthe
Originall or Naturall Liberty ofthe People.
A Queſtion never yet difputed,
though moſt
neceffary in thefe Times.
LUCAN. Lib. 3 .
(-
-)
LIBERTAS(———— ) Populi quem Regna cohercent
Libertate Perit :
Neg, enim libertas gratior ulla eft
Quam Domino fervire bono
Printed in the Year, 1648.
CLAUDIAN.
26.


!


The Preface.
E do but flatter our felves, ifwe hopeever
to begovernedwithout an Arbitrarypower.
No: we mistake, the queſtion isnot, whe-
thhertherefhallbeanArbitrarypower, but
the only point is, who shallhave that Arbi-
trarypower, whether one man ormany : there neverwas
nor never can be any people governedwithout apower of
makingLaws,and everypower ofmaking Laws must be Ar-
bitrary : for to make a Law accordingto Law, is contradi-
&tio in adjecto : It isgenerally confeffed that in a Demo-
cratie, theSupream or Arbritrarypower ofmakingLaws is
in amultitude; andfo inan Ariftocracy the like Legiflative
er Arbitrary power is in afew, or in the Nobility. And
therefore by a neceffaryconſequence in a Monarchythefame
Legislativepowermust beinone; according to the rule of
Ariftotle, whofaith, Government is in One, or ina Few,
orinMany.
This antient Doctrine of Government, in theſe latter
dane's hathbeenstrangly refinedbythe Romaniſts, andwon-
derfullyimprovedfince the reformation especially inpoint
of Monarchy, by an opinionthat the people have original-
ly a powerto create feverall forts of Monarchy, tolimit
andcompoundthem with other formes of Government,
at their pleaſure.
A 3
As


The Preface.
Asfor this naturallpower ofthe people, they find neither
Scripture,reafon, or practice tojuftifie it : for thoughfeve-
rall Kingdomes havefeverall and diftinct Laws onefrom
an other: yet that dothnotmake feverallforts of Monar-
chy : Nor doth the difference of obtaining the Supreame
power,whetherby Conquest, election, fucceßion, orby any
other way make different forts of Government.
It is the
difference onely of the Authors ofthe Laws, and not ofthe
Laws themselves that alters the forme ofgovernment, that
is, whether one man, or more then one make the Laws.
Since thegrowthofthisnew doctrine of the Limitation
and Mixture of Monarchy, it is most apparent that Mo-
narchy hathbin crucified( as it were) between two Theeves,
the Pope and the People; for what principles the Papiſts
makeufe offor the power ofthe Pope above Kings ; the
veryfameby blotting out the wordPope, andputtinginthe
word People, the Plcbiſts take up to uſe against their So-
veraignes.
Ifwe wouldtruly know what Popery is, weſhallfindby the
Lawes, andStatutes ofthe Realme, that the main, andin-
deed, the onlypoint of Popery is the alienating and with-
drawing of Subjects from their obedience to
their
Prince, toraiſe Sedition and Rebellion : if Popery and
Popularity agree in this point, The Kings of Chriften-
dome thathavefhaken offthe power of the Pope have
made nogreat bargain ofit, ifinplace ofone Lord abroad,
they get many Lords at home within their own Kingdoms.
Icannot but reverence that form of Government which
was allowedandmade uſe offor Gods ownpeople, andfor
all other Nations.
It were impiety, to think,
that Godwho
was carefullto appoint Fudicialllawesforhis chofenpeople
would not furnish them withthe bestforme ofgovernment :
or to imagine that the rules given in divers places inthe
Goffel


The Preface.
Gospelby ourbleffed Saviour and his Apoftles for obedience
to Kingsfhouldnow,like Almanacks out ofdate,be ofno ufe
to us becauſe it ispretended we have a Forme of Govern-
ment now, not once thought ofinthofe daies.
It is afhame
andfcandalfor us Chriftians to feek the originall of Go-
vernmentfrom the inventions orfictions ofPoets, Orators,
Philofophers, and heathen Hiftorians, who all lived thou-
fands ofyears after the Creation,& were(in amanner) ig-
norant ofit : and to neglect the Scriptures which have with
more authority most particularlygiven us the true grounds
andprinciples ofGovernment.
Thefe Confiderations caufed me to fcruple this moderne
piece ofPoliticks touching Limited andMixed Monarchy,
andfinding no other that preſented us with the nature and
meanes ofLimitation andMixture, but an anonymus Au.
thour: I havedrawn a few brief observations upon the
moft confiderablepart ofhis Treatise, in whichI defire to
receive fatisfaction from the Authorhimself ifit may be,
accordingtohis promife in his Preface; or ifnot from him,
from any otherfor him .
THE



I
THE
ANARCHY
OF
A LIMITED or MIXED
MONARCHY.
Here is ſcarce the meanest man of the multitude
but can now in thefe daies tell us that the Go-
vernment ofthe Kingdome ofEngland is aLIMI-
TED and MIXED Monarchy : And it is no
mervail fince all the difputes and arguments of
thefe diſtracted timesboth from the Pulpit and
the Preffe do tend and end in this Conclufion.
The Author ofthe Treatife ofMonarchy hath copiouſly hand-
led the nature and manner of Limited and Mixed Monarchy,
and is the firſt and onely man ( that I know ) hath undertaken
the task ofdefcribing it, others onely mention it as takingit for
granted.
Doctor Ferne gives the Author of this Treatife ofMonarchy
this teftimony, that the Mixture ofgovernment is more acurately
delivered andurged by this Treatife then by the Author oftheFul
ler Anfwer. And in another place Doctor Ferne faith, he allows
his diftinction ofMonarchy into LimitedandMixed.
I have withfome diligence looked over this Treatife, but can-
B
not
P.3.
[p. 13


The Anarchy of
P.6.
not approve oftheſe diſtinctions which he propounds, I fubmit
the reafons ofmy diflike to others judgements. I am ſomewhat
confident that his doctrine of Limitedand Mixed Monarchy isan
opinion but ofyeſterday, and of no antiquity, a meer innovation
in policy, not fo old as New England, though calculated properly
for that Meridian. For in his firſt part ofthe Treatiſe whichcon-
cerns Monarchy in Generall, there is not one proof, text, or ex-
ample in Scripture that he hath produced to juftifie his conceit
ofLimitedand Mixed Monarchy. Neither doth he affordusfo
much as one paffage or reafon out of Ariftotle, whose books
of Politicks, and whofe naturall reafons are of greateſt autho-
rity and credit with all rationall men next to the facred Scrip-
ture : Nay, I hope I may affirme, and be able to prove that A-
rist. doth confute both limited and mixed Monarchy, howsoever
Doctor Ferne think thefe new opinions to be raiſed upon Arift.
principles. As for other Polititians or Hiftorians, either divine or
humane, ancient or modern, our Author brings not one to con-
firm his opinions, nor doth he, nor can hefhewthat ever any Na-
tion or people were governed by a limitedor mixedMonarchy.
Machivellis the firſt in Chriſtendome that I can find that writ
ofa MixedGovernment, but not one fyllable of a Mixed Mo-
narchy : he, in his difcourfes or difputations upon the Decades of
Livyfallsfo enamored with the Roman Common-wealth, that
he thought he could never fufficientlygrace that populargovern-
ment, unleffe hefaid, there was fomething ofMonarchy in it :yet
hewas neverfo impudent as to fay, it was a mixed Monarchy.
And what Machivell hath faid for Rome, the likehath Contarene
for Venice ; But Bodin hath layed open the errors ofboth theſe,
as alſo ofPolibius, and fome few others that held thelike opini-
ons. As for the Kingdome of England ifit havefound out a form
ofGovernment (as the Treatife layeth it down ) offuch perfecti-
onas neverany other people could ; It is both a glory to the
Nation, and alſo to this Author who hath firft decipher'd it.
Inow make my approach to the Book it felf: The title is, A
Treatife ofMonarchy. The first part ofit is, of Monarchy in Ge-
nerall: Where first, I charge the Author, that he hath not given
us any definition or defcription of Monarchy in Generall : for by
the

A Limited or Mixed Monarchy.
3
the rules ofmethod he ſhould have firft defined, and then divi-
ded
for ifthere be ſeverall forts of Monarchy, then in fome-
thing they mult agree, which makes them to be Monarchies, and
infomethingthey muſt diſagree and differ which makesthem to
be feverall forts ofMonarchies : in the first place he ſhould have
ſhewed us inwhat they all agreed which muſt have been a defini-
tion ofMonarchy in Generall, which is the foundation of the
Treatife ; and except that be agreed upon , we fhal argueupon we
know not what ; I preffe not this maine omiffion of our Author
out ofanyhumor ofwrangling, but becauſe I am confident that
had he pitched upon any definition ofMonarchy in Generall, his
own definition would have confuted his whole Treatife : Befides
I find him pleaſed to give us a handfome definition of Abfolute
Monarchy, from whence I may infer, that he knew no other defi-
nition that would have fitted all his other forts of Monarchy, it
concerned him to have produced it, left it might be thought there
could be no Monarchy but Abſolute.
What our Author hath omitted, I ſhall attempt to fupply, and
leave to the ſcanning. And it ſhall be a reall as well as nominall
definition ofMonarchy. A Monarchy is the government ofone a-
lone. Forthe better credit of this definition, though it be able to
maintain it ſelf, yet I fhall deduce it from the principles of our
Author ofthe Treatife ofMonarchy.
We all knowthat this word Monarch is compounded of two
Greek words, MóvⒸand dpxeïv, ¿pxeïr, is imperare, togovernant
rule, uby
fignifics one alone.
The underſtanding of theſe two'
wordsmay be picked out of our Author.
Firſt, for government
he teacheth us, it is Poteftatis exercitium, the exercife ofa morall
power ; next he grants us, that every Monarch ( even his limited
Monarch ) must have the Supream power ofthe State inhim,ſo that
hispower mustno way belimitedby any power above his, for then he
were not a Monarch, but afabordinate Magiftrate. Here we have
a fair confeffion ofa fupreame unlimited power in his limited
Monarch : ifyou will know what he meanesby theſe wordsſu
pream power, turn to his 26 page, there you will find, Supream
power is either Legislative, or Gubernative, and that the legislative
power is thechief of the two, he makes both fupream, and yet one
chier : the like diftinction he hath before, where he faith, The
B2
power
P. I.
P. 12.


4
The Anarchy of
P. 5.
P.40.
P. 12.
.14.
P.16.
power ofMagistracy, inrespect of its degrees, is Nomotheticall or
Architectonicall: and Gubernative or Executive : bythesewords
of Legislative, Nomotheticall and Architectonicall power, in plain
English , he understands, a power ofmaking Laws ; and byGuber-
native and Executive, a power ofputtingthefe Laws in execution
byjudgingandpuniſhing offenders.
The refult we have from hence is, that by the Authors acknow-
ledgment, every Monarch muſt have the Supream power, and
that fupream power is, a power to make laws : and howsoever
the Author makes the Gubernative and Executive power a part
ofthe Supream power ; yet he confeffeth the Legifive to be
chief, or the highest degree ofpower, for he doth acknowledge de
grees of Supream power ; nay, he afterwards teacheth us, that
the Legislativepower is the height ofpower, to which the other parts
are fubfequent andfubfervient, if Gubernative be fubfervient to
Legiflative,how can Gubernative power be ſupream ?
Now let us examine the Authors Limited Monarch by theſe
his own rules, he tells us, that in a moderated, limited,ſtinted, con-
ditionate, legall or allayed Monarchy, ( for all theſe tearmshe hath
for it ) the Supreampower must be reſtrained byſome Lam accor
ding to which this power wasgiven, and by direction of which this
powermust aft, when in a line before he faid, that the Monarchs
power must not be limited by anypower above his : yet here he will
have his Supream power reftrained ; not limited, and yet reftrai-
ned ; is not a reſtraint, a limitation ? and ifreſtrained, how is it
fupream
and ifreſtrained byfomelaw, is not the power ofthat
law, and ofthem that made that law above his fupream power ?
and ifbythe direction of fuch lawonly he muft govern, where
is the Legiflative power which is the chiefof Supream power ?
when the Law muft rule and govern the Monarch, and not the
Monarch the Law, he hath at the moſt but a Gubernative or
Executive power : if his authority tranfcends its bounds, ifit cons-
mandbeyondthe Law, andthe Subject is not bound legally tofubje
Elian infuchcafes, and ifthe utmost extent ofthe Law of thelandbe
the measure of the Limited Monarchs power, and Subjects duty,
where fhall wefind the Supream power that Cuman or apex por
reftatis, thatprime
x , which our Author faith, muſtbeinevery
Monarch: Theword dx ,whichfignifics, principality andpower,
doth


ALimitedand Mixed Monarchy.
doth alfo fignific,principium, beginning ; which doth teach us, that
bythewordPrince, or principality, the principium or beginning of
Governmentis meant ; this, ifit be given to the Law, it robs the
Monarch, and makes the Lawthe primum mobile, and fo that
which is but the inftrument, orfervant to the Monarch, becomes
the mafter. Thus much ofthe word apxev.
The otherword is Mór
, folus ,one alone : the Monarch muſt not
only have the Supream power unlimited, but he muſt have it a-
lone(without any companions.) Our Author teacheth us, He is no
Monarchifthe Supreampower be not in one. And again he ſaith,
ifyouput theapex poteftatis, orfupreampower, in the whole body, or
apart ofit,you deftroy the being ofMonarchy.
P. 15.
P. 17.
Now, letus fee if his mixed Monarchy be framed accordingto
thefe his own principles : First, he faith, in a mixed Monarchy
P.25..
thefoveraignpower must be originally in all three Eftates. And a-
gain, hiswordsare, the three Eftates are allfourers in the Supream
power
theprimity ofshare in thefupreampowerisin One. Here
wefind, that hethat told usthe fupream power muſt be in one,
willnow allow his mixed Monarch but one fhare only of the fu
preampower, andgives other fhares to the Eftates : thushede-
troies thebeing of Monarchyby putting the Supream power or
culmen poteftatis, or apart of it in the whole body, or apart thereof,
and yet formerly he confeffeth, that thepower ofMagistracy can-
not wellbe divided, for it is one fimple thing or indiviſable beam ofdi-
vineperfection, but he can make this indivifable beam to be divi-
fable into three fhares. Ihave done with the word MóvⒸ, folus,
alone.
Ihave dwelt thelongerupon this definition of Monarchy, be-
cauſe the apprehending of it out of the Authors own grounds
quite overthrows both his clonarch Limitedbylaw, and his Mo-
narch Mixedwith the States. Forto Govern, is to give aLawto
others ; and not to have a Lave given to Govern, and limit him
that Governs: And to govern alone is not to have fharers or
companions mixed withthe Governor. Thusthe two words of
which Monarchy is compounded contradict the two forts ofMo-
narchywhichhe pleads for ; and by confequence his whole Trea-
tife, forthefetwo forts oflimited and mixed Monarchytakeup
(in a manner) his whole Book.
B.3
Iwill
P. 5.


6
The Anarchy of
P. 2.
I will now touch fome few particular paffages in the Trea-
tife.
Our Author first confeffeth, it is Gods expreffe ordinance there
Shouldbe Government, and he proves it by Gen. 3. 16. where God
ordained Adam to rule over his Wife,and her defires were to befub-
ject tohis ;and as hers,fo all theirs that ſhould come ofher. Here
we have the originall grant of Government, & the fountain of all
powerplaced in the father of all mankind,accordingly we find the
law for obedience to government given in the tearms of honor thy
Father: not only the conftitution ofpower in generall, but the li-
mitation of it to one kind ( that is, to Monarchy, orthe govern-
ment ofone alone ) and the determination ofit to the individual
perfon & line of Adams are all three ordinances ofGod. Neither
Eve nor her Children could either limit Adams power, orjoin o-
thers with him in the government, and what was given unto A
dam was given in his perfon to his pofterity. This paternal power
continued monarchicall to the Floud, and after the Floud to the
confufion of Babelwhen Kingdomes were firft erected, planted,
orſcattered over the face ofthe world;we find Gen. 10.11 . It was
done byColonies of whole families, over which, the prime Fa-
thers had fupream power, and were Kings,who were all thefons
orgrand-children of Noah, from whom they derived a fatherly
and regall power over their families. Now ifthis fupream power
wasfetled and founded by God himſelf in the fatherhood, how
is it poffible for the people to have any right or title to alter and
difpofe of it otherwife ? what commiffion can they fhew that
gives them power either of limitation or mixture ? It was Gods
ordinance, that fupremacy ſhould be unlimited in Adam, and as
large as all the acts ofhis will : and as in him, ſo in all others that
havefupream power, as appears by the judgement and ſpeech of
the people to fofbuah when he was fupream Governour, theſe
are their words to him, All that thou commandeft us wee will
do, whosoeverhebe that doth rebel against thy commandement, and
willnot hearken unto thy words in allthat thou commandeft him, he
Shalbeput to death : we may not fay that theſe were evill Coun-
fellours or flattering Courtiers ofJoshuah, or that he himſelfwas
a Tyrant for havingfuch arbitrary power.
Our Author, and all
thofe,who affirm, that power is conveyed toperfons by publickcon-
Sent,
'A Limited orMixed Monarchy.
7
fent, areforcedto confeffe, that it is the fatherly power that firſt
inables a people to make fuch conveyance, fo that admitting ( as
they hold ) that our Anceſtors did at firſt convey power, yet the
reafon why we now living, doe fubmit to fuch power is, for that
our Fore-fathers every one for himſelf, his family, and pofterity,
had a power of refigning up themſelves and us to a fupream
power.
Asthe Scripture teacheth us, that fupream power was o-
riginally in the fatherhood without anylimitation, fo likewiſe reaſon
doth evince it, that if God ordained that Supremacy ſhould be,
that thenfupremacy mult ofneceffity be unlimited , forthe power
that limits muſt be above that power which is limited , if it beli
mited it cannot be fupream : fo that if our Author will grant fu-
pream power to be the ordinance of God, the fupream power
will prove itfelfto be unlimited by the fame ordinance, becauſe a
fupream limited power is a contradiction.
The monarchicall power ofAdam the Father of all flesh, being
by a general binding ordinancefetled by God in him & his pofte-
rityby right of fatherhood, the form of Monarchy must be pre-
ferr'd above other forms, except the like ordinance for other
forms can befhewed : neither may men according to their relations
to theform they live under to their affections and judgments indivers
refpects prefer, or compare any otherform with Monarchy. The point
that moſt perplexeth our Author and many others is, that if Mo-
narchybe allowed to be the ordinance ofGod,an abfurdity would
follow, that weshoulduncharitably condemn all the comunities which
have not that form, for violation of Gods ordinance, and pronounce
thofe other powers unlawfull : if thofe who live under a Monarchy
can juftifie theform they live under to be Gods ordinance, they
are not bound to forbear their own juftification, becauſe others
cannot dothe like for theform they live under ; let others look
to the defence oftheir own government : if it cannot be proved
orfhewed that any other form ofgovernment had ever any law-
fullbeginning, but was brought in, or erected by rebellion, muſt
therefore the lawfull and juft obedience to Monarchy be denied
to bethe ordinance ofGod.
To proceed with our Author, in the 3 page, he faith, the Higher
Power is Gods ordinance : That it refideth in One or more , in fuch
orfuch a way, isfrom humane defignment, God byno wordbinds any
people


0
The
Anar
of
people to this or thatform, till they by their own act bind themſelves.
Becauſe the power and confent of the people in government is
the burden ofthe whole Book, and our Author expects it should
be admitted as a magifteriall poftulation without any other proof
then anaked fuppofition , and fince others alfo maintain that ori
ginally Fower, was or now is in the People, and that the firft Kings
were chofen by the People : they may not be offended, iftheybe
asked in whatfenfe they underftand the word [ People]becauſe
this, as many other words hath different acceptions, beingfome-
times taken in a larger, other whiles in a ſtricter fenfe.
Literally,
and in the largeſt ſenſethe word People fignifies the whole multi-
tude ofmankind, butfiguratively and fynecdochecally it notes many
times the major part of a multitude, or ſometimes the better, or
the richer, or the wiser, or fome other part ; and oftentimes a
veryſmall part ofthe people, iftherebe no other apparent op
pofite party hath the name ofthe people by prefumption.
Ifthey underſtand that the entire multitude, or whole people
have originally by nature power to chufe a King, they must re-
member that by their own principles, and rules by nature all man-
kind intheworld makesbut one People, who they fuppofe tobe
born alike to an equall freedome from fubjection, and where fuch
freedome is, there all things muft of neceffity be common, and
therefore without a joynt confent of the whole people of the
world, no onething can be made proper to any one man, but it
will be an injury, and an ufurpation upon the common right of
all others ; From whence it follows, that naturallfreedome being
oncegranted,therecannot be any one man chofen a King without
the univerfall confent of all the people of the world at one in-
ftant, nemine contradicente. Nay, if it be true that nature hath
made all men free ; though all mankind ſhould concur in one
vote,yet it cannot feem reaſonable, that they fhould have power
to alterthe law ofnature ; for if no manhave power to take a-
wayhis own lifewithout the guilt ofbeing a murtherer of him-
felf, how can any people confer fuch a power as they have not
themſelves upon any one man, without being accefforiesto their
own deaths ; and every particular man become guilty of being
feledefe?
Ifthis generall fignification oftheword People be disavowed,
and

ALimitedand Mixed Monarchy.
9
and menwillfuppofe that the people of particular Regions, or
Countrieshave power and freedome to chufe unto themſelves
Kings ; thenlet them but obferve the confequence : Since nature
hath not diſtinguiſhed the habitable world into Kingdomes, nor
determined what part of a people fhall belong to one Kingdome,
and what to another, it follows that the originall freedome of
mankind beingfuppofed , every man is at liberty to be of what
Kingdome he pleafe, and fo every petty company hath a right to
make a Kingdome by itfelf, and not only every City, but every
Village, and every Family ; nay, and every particular man a li-
berty to chufe himſelf tobe his owne King if he pleafe, and he
were a mad man that being by nature free would chufe any man
but himselfto be his own Governour. Thus to avoid the having
but ofone King ofthe whole world, we ſhall run into a liberty of
having as many Kings as there be men in the world, which upon
the matter,is to have no King at all, but to leave all men to their
naturall liberty, which is the mifchief the Pleaders for naturall
Liberty do pretend they would moft avoid.
But ifneither the whole People ofthe world, nor the whole
people ofany part of the world be meant : but only the major
part, orfome other part, of a part ofthe world : yet, ftill the ob-
jection will be the ftronger. For befides that nature hath made
no partition oftheworld, or of the people into diltinct King-
domes, and that without an univerfal confent at one and the fame
inftant no partition can be made
yet if it were lawfull for par-
ticular parts ofthe world by confent to chufe their Kings , never-
theleffe, their elections would bind none to ſubjection but only
fuch as confented ; forthe major part neverbinds, but where men
at first either agree to be fo bound, or where a higher power fo
commands: Now there being no higher power then nature, but
God himself ; where neither nature nor God appoints the major
part to bind, their confent is not binding to any but only to them-
felves who confent.
Yet,forthe prefent to gratifie them fo far as to admit that ei-
ther bynature, or by a generall confent ofall mankind, the world
at firſt wasdivided into particular Kingdomes, and themajorpart
ofthe people ofeach Kingdom affembled, allowed to chufe their
King: yet it cannot truly be faid that ever the whole people, or
C
the


10
The Anarchy of
the major part, orindeed any confiderable part ofthe wholepeo-
ple of anynation ever affembled to any fuch purpofe ; For ex-
ceptbyfome fecret miraculous inftinct they fhould all meet at
one time, and place ; what one man, or company of men leffe
then the whole people hath power to appoint either time, or
place of elections , where all be alike free bynature? and without
a lawfullfummons it is moſt unjust to bind thoſe that be abſent.
Thewhole people cannot fummon it felf, one man is fick, another
is lame, a third is aged, and afourth is under age of difcretion :
all theſe at fome time or other, or at fome place or other might
beable to meet, ifthey might chufe their own time and place, as
men naturally free fhould."
In Affemblies that are by humane politique conftitution, the fu-
perior power that ordains fuch affemblies, can regulate and con-
fine them both for time, place, perfons, and other circumſtances :
but where there is an equality by nature, there can be no fuperior
power, there every Infant at the hour it is born in hath a like in-
tereft with the greateſt and wiſeſt man in the world. Mankind is
like the fea, ever ebbing or flowing, every minute one is borne,
another dies, thofe that are the people, this minute, arenot the
people the next minute, in every inftant and point of timethere
is a variation : no one time can be indifferent for all mankind to
affemble, it cannot but be mischievous alwaies, at the leaſt to all
Infants, and others under age of diſcretion ; not to ſpeak ofwo-
men, eſpecially Virgins, who by birth have as much naturall free
dome as any other, and therefore ought not to loſe their liberty
without their own confent.
But in part to falve this, it will be faid that Infants and Chil
dren maybe concluded by the votes of their Parents.
This reme-
dymay cure fome part of the miſchief, but it deftroies the whole
cauſe
and at laft ftumbles upon the true originall of govern
ment. For if it be allowed, that the acts of Parents bindthe
Children, then farewell the doctrine of the naturall freedome of
mankind, wherefubjection of Children to Parents is naturall,there
can be no naturall freedome.
If any reply, that not all children
fhall be boundbytheir Parents confent, but onely thofe that are
under age : It muſt be confidered ,that in nature there is no nonage,
ifa manbe not borne free, fhe doth not affigne him any other
time


ALimitedor Mixed Monarchy.
II
time whenhe ſhall attaine his freedome : or iffhe did, then Chil-
dren attaining that age fhould be diſcharged oftheir Parents
contract.
So that in conclufion, if it be imagined that the people
were everbut once free fromfubjection by nature, it will prove a
meer impoffibility ever lawfully to introduce any kind of go-
vernment whatſoever without apparent wrong to a multitude of
people.
It is further obfervable, that ordinarily Children and Servants
are far a greater number then Parents and Mafters, and for the
major part of theſe to be able to vote and appoint what govern-
ment or Governours their Fathers and Malters fhall befubject
unto, is moſt unnaturall, and in effect to give the Children the
government over their Parents.
To all this it may be oppofed, what need difpute how a People
can chufe a King, fince there be multitude of examples that Kings
havebeen, and are now adaies chofen by their People ? The an-
fiveris.
1.The queſtion is not of thefact, but of the right, whe-
ther it have been done by a naturall, or by an ufurped right. 2.Ma-
ny Kings are, and havebin choſen by ſome ſmall part ofa People,
but by the whole, or major part ofa Kingdom not any at all. Moft
have been elected by the Nobility, Great men, and Princes ofthe
bloud, as in Poland, Denmarke, and in Sweden ; not by any col-
lective or reprefentative body of any Nation : fometimes a facti-
ous orfeditious City, or a mutinous Army hath fet up a King, but
none ofall thoſe could ever prove they had right or juſt title ei-
therby nature, or any otherwiſefor ſuch elections : we may re-
folveupon theſe two propofitions. 1.That the People have no
power or right ofthemselves to chufe Kings.
2. If they had anyfuck
right, it is notpoffiblefor them any way lawfully to exercife it.
You willfay, There must neceffarily be a right infome bodyto e-
lect, incafe a Kingdie without an Heir. I answer, No Kingcandie
without an Heir as long as there is any one man living in the world, it
maybethe Heir may be unknown to the people, but that is no
fault in nature, but the negligence or ignorance of thoſe whom it
concerns. But ifa King could die without an Heir,yet the Kingly
power in that caſe ſhal not eſcheat to the whole people,but to the
fupream Heads and Fathers ofFamilies; not as they arethe people,
but quatenus, they are Fathers ofpeople, overwhom they have a
C 2
fupream


12
The Anarchy of
fupream power divolved unto them after the death of their fove-
raign Anceſtor, and ifany can have a right to chufe a King,it muſt
be thefe Fathers byconferring their diftinct fatherly powers upon
one man alone. Chief fathers in Scripture are accounted as all
the people, as all the Children of Ifrael, as all the Congregation, as
the Text plainly expounds it felf, 2 Chr. 1.2 . where Solomon ſpeaks
to All Ifrael, that is, to the Captains, the fudges, and to everyGo-
vernour, the CHIEF OF THE FATHERS, and fo the Elders of
Ifrael are expounded to be the chief of the Fathers ofthe Children
ofIfrael, 1 King.8.1 . and the 2 Chr.5.2 .
If it be objected, That Kings are not now ( as they were at the
first planting or peopling of the world ) the Fathers of their
People, or Kingdoms, and that the fatherhood hath loft the right
ofgoverning. An anſwer is, That all Kings that now are, or ever
were; are, or were either Fathers of their People, orthe Heirs
of fuch Fathers , or Ufurpers of the right of fuch Fathers : It is
a truth undeniable that there cannot be any multitude of men
whatfoever,either great, or fmall, though gathered together from
the feverall corners and remoteft regions of the world, but that in
thefame multitude confidered by it felf,thereis oneman amongſt
them that in nature hath a right to be the King of all the reft, as
beingthe next Heir to Adam : and all the others fubject unto
him, every man by nature is a King, or a Subject : the obedience
which all Subjects yeild to Kings is but the paying of that duty
which is due tothe fupream fatherhood : Many times bythe act
either ofan Ufurper himſelf, or ofthofethat fethim up, the true
Heire of a Crown is difpoffeffed, God ufing the miniftry of the
wickedeft men for the removing and fetting up of Kings : infuch
cafes the Subjects obedience to the fatherlypower muft go along
and wait upon Gods providence who only hath right to give,and
take away Kingdomes, and thereby to adopt Subjects into the o-
bedience ofanother fatherly power : according to that ofA
rift: πατρικὴγὰρ ἀρχὴβέλε) ἡβασιλέια ?). A Monarchy or King-
domewillbe afatherlygovernment. Ethic. 1.8. c.12.
Howeverthe naturall freedome ofthe People be cried up asthe
fole means to determine the kind ofgovernment, and the Gover-
nours : yet in the clofe, all the favourers ofthis opinion are con-
ftrained to grant, that the obedience which is dueto the fatherly
power


ALimitedand Mixed Monarchy.
13
power is the true and only cauſe of the ſubjection, which we that
arenow livinggive to Kings, fince none ofus gave conſent to go-
vernment, but only our Fore-fathers act and confenthath conclu-
ded us.
Whereas many confeffe that government onlyinthe abstract is
the ordinance of God, they are not able to prove any fiich ordi-
nance in the Scripture, but only in the fatherly power, and there-
forewefind the Commandement that enjoynes obedience to Su-
periours given in the tearms of Honour thy Father : fo that not
onely the powerorright ofgovernment, but the form of the power
of governing, and the perfon havingthat power, are all the ordi-
nance ofGod, the first Father had not onelyfimply power, but
power Monarchicall as he was a Father immediately from God ;
Forbythe appointment ofGod asfoon as Adam was Created he
was Monarch of the World, though he had no Subjects ; for
though there could notbe actuall government untill there were
Subjects, yet bythe right of nature it was due to Adam to be
Governour ofhis pofterity : though not in act, yet at leaſt in ba
bit Adam was a King from his Creation : And in the ſtate ofin-
nocency he had been Governour ofhis Children, for the integri-
ty or excellency of the Subjects doth not take away the order or
eminency ofthe Governour. Eve was fubject to Adam before he
finned, the Angels who are of a pure nature are fubject to God :
which confutes their faying, who in difgrace ofcivill government
orpower fay it was brought in by fin : Government as to coa-
dive powerwas after fin, becauſe coaction ſuppoſeth ſome dif-
orderwhich was not in theſtate of innocency : But as for dire-
ctivepowerthe condition ofhumane nature requires it, fince civil
fociety cannot be imagined without power of Government : for
although as long asmencontinued in the ſtate of innocency they
might notneed the direction of Adam in thoſe things which were
meceffarily and morally to be done, yet things indifferent that de-
pended meerly on their free will might be directed by the power
ofAdamscommand.
Ifwe confider the firſt plantations of the world which were
after thebuilding of Babelwhenthe confufion of tongues was,we
may find the divifion of the earth into diſtinct Kingdomes and
Countries by feverall families, whereof the Sons or Grand-chil-
€ 3
dren


14
The Anarchy of
dren of Noah were the Kings or Governours by a fatherly right,
and forthe preſervation of this power and right in the Fathers,
God was pleafed upon feverall Families to beltow a Language on
eachby it felf, the better to unite it into a Nation or Kingdome,
as appears by the words of the Text, Gen. 10. These are the Fa
milies ofthe Sons of Noah, after their generations in their Nati
ons, andbythese were the Nations divided in the earth after the
floud: Every one after His TONGUE AFTER THEIR FAMI
LIES in their Nations.
The Kings of England have been gratiouſly pleaſed to admit,
and accept the Commons in Parliament as the repreſentees ofthe
Kingdom, yet really and truly they are not the repreſentative bo-
dy of the whole Kingdom.
The Commons in Parliament are not the reprefentativebody
ofthe whole Kingdome, they do not repreſent the King who is
the head and principall member of the Kingdome, nor do they
repreſent the Lords who are the nobler and higher part ofthe
body ofthe Realme, and are perfonally prefent in Parliament,
and therefore need no repreſentation. The Commons onely re-
prefent a part of the lower or inferior part of the body of the
People, which are the Free-holders worth 40s. by the year, and
the Commons or Free-men of Cities and Burroughs, or the ma-
jor part of them.
All which are not one quarter, nay, not a
tenth part ofthe Commons of the Kingdome, for in every Pa-
rishfor one Free-holder there may be found ten that are no Free-
holders
and anciently before Rents were improved there were
nothingneerfo many Free-holders of 40 s. by the year as now
are to befound.
:
Theſcope and Conclufion of this difcourfe and Argument is,
that the people taken in what notion, orſenſeſoever, either dif
fufively, collectively, or repreſentatively, have not, nor cannot ex-
ercife anyright or power of their own by nature either in chufing
or in regulating Kings. But whatfoever power any people doth
lawfully exercife , it muſt receive it from a fupreame power on
earth, and practice it with fuch limitations as that fuperior power
fhallappoint. To returne to our Author.
He


ALimitedor Mixed Monarchy.
15
He divides Monarchy into-
Abfolute,
Limited.
Abfolute Monarchy (faith he) is, when the Soveraignty is fo
fully in one, that it hath no limits or bounds under God but his owne
will. This definition ofhis I embrace ; And as before I charged
our Authorfor not giving us a definition ofMonarchy in general,
fo I now notehimfor not affording us any definition of any o-
ther particular kind of Monarchybut onely of abfolute, it may
peradventure make fome doubt that there is no other fort but
only that whichhe calls abfolute.
Concerning abfolute Monarchy, he grants, that fuch were the
antient Eaftern Monarchies,and that ofthe Turkand Perfian at this
day, herein he faith very true. And we must remember him
though he doe not mention them that the Monarchs ofJudah and
Ifraelmuſt be comprehended under the number of thofe he calls
the Eastern Monarchies : and truly if he had faid that all the an-
tient Monarchies of the world had been abfolute I fhould not
have quarreld at him, nor doe I know who could have difproved
him .
Next it follows, that Abfolute Monarchy is, when a people are
abfolutely refigned up, or refigne up themselves tobe governedbythe
will ofOne man
where menput themselves into this utmeft de-
gree offubjection by oath and contract, or are borne and brought unto
it by Gods providence. In both thefe places he acknowledgeth
there may be other means of obtaining a Monarchy befides the
contract ofa Nation, or peoples refigning up themſelves to be
governed, which is contrary to what he after faies, that the fole
mean or root of all Soveraignty is the confent and fundamentall con-
trait ofaNation ofmen.
Moreoverthe Author determins, that Abfolute Monarchy is a
lawfullgovernment, and that men may be borne and brought unto it
byGodsprovidence, it binds them, and they must abide it because an
ath to alawfull thing is obligatory. This pofition ofhis I approve,
but his reafon doth not fatisfie, for men are bound to obey a law-
full Governour, though neither they, nor their Anceſtors ever
took oath.
Thenhe proceeds, and confeffeth that in Rom.
p. 6.
P. 12.
13. the power
P. 7.
which


16
The Anarchy of
P. 54.
I.
2.
whichthen was, was Abfolute : yet the Apostle not excluding it, calls
it Gods ordinance, and commands fubjection to it ; fo Chrifts com-
mands Tribute to be paid, and paies it himselfe ; yet it was an arbi-
trary tax, the production ofan abfolutepower. Theſe are the loyall
expreffions ofour Author touching abfolute or arbitrary Monar
chy: I doe the rather mention theſe paffages of our Author, be-
caufe verymany in thefe daies doe not stick to maintain, that an
arbitrary or Abfolute Monarch not limited by law, is all onewith
a Tyrant, and to be governed by one mans will, is to be made a
flave: It is a queftion whether our Author be not of that mind
whenhe faith, abfolutefubjection isfervitude, and thereupon a late
friend, to limited Monarchy, affirmes in a diſcourſe upon the que-
ſtion in debate between the King and Parliament, That to make a
King by theftandard ofGods word is to make the Subjects flaves for
confcience fake. Ahard faying, and I doubt whether he that gives
this cenfure can be excuſed from blafphemy.
It is a bold fpeech
to condemn all the Kings of Judah for Tyrants, or to lay all their
Subjects were flaves.
But certainly the man doth not know nei
ther what a Tyrant is, or what a Slave is : indeed the words are
frequent enough in every mans mouth,& our old English Tranfla
tion ofthe Bible ufeth fometimes the word Tyrant, but the Au-
thors ofour new Tranflation have been fo carefull as not onceto
ufe the word, but onelyfor the proper name ofa man, Act.19.9.
becauſe theyfind no Hebrew word in the Scripture to fignifie a
Tyrant, or a flave. Neither Arift: Bodin, nor Sir Walter Raleigh
(who were all men of deep judgement ) can agree in a definition
or defcription oftyranny, though they have all three laboured in
the point. And I make ſome queſtion whether any man can pof-
fibly defcribe what a Tyrant is, and then tell me any one man that
ever was in the world that was a Tyrant according to that de-
fcription.
I return again to our Treatife of Monarchy, where I find three
DEGREES ofabfolute Monarchy:
1. Wherethe Monarch, whofe Willis the law, dothfet himselfno
law to rule by, but by commands of his own judgement as he thinks
fit.
2. Whenhefets a law, by which he will ordinarily governe, re-
ferving to himself a liberty to varyfrom it as oft as in his difcretion
be


ALimitedand Mixed Monarchy.
he thinks Fit, and in this the Soveraign is as free as theformer.
13. Where he not onlyſets a rule, but promifeth in many cafes not
to alter it, but this promife or engagement is an after condifcent or
act ofgrace not diffolving the abfolute Oath ofſubjection which went
before it.
For the firft of thefe three, there is no question but it is a pure
abfolute Monarchy;but as forthe other two,though he ſay,they be
abfolute,yet in regard,they fet themſelves limits or laws to govern
by,ifit pleaſe ourAuthor to term them limitedMonarchs,I wil not
oppofe him, yet I must tell him that his third degree of abfolute
Monarchy isfuch a kind, as I believe, never hath been , nor ever
canbeintheworld.
Fora Monarch to promife and engage in
many cafes not to alteralaw, it is moſt neceſſary that thofe many
cafes fhould be particularly expreffed at the bargain making :
Now hethat underſtands the nature and condition of all humane
laws, knows that particular cafes are infinite and not comprehen-
fible within any rules or laws, and ifmany cafes fhould be com-
prehended, and many omitted, yet even thofe that were com-
prehended would admit ofvariety of interpretations and difpu
tations, therefore our Author doth not, nor can tell us of any
fuch referved cafes promiſed by any Monarch.
Again,where he faith, An after condifcent or Alt ofgrace doth not
diffolve the abfolute Oath of ſubjection whichwent before it, though
in this he ſpeak true, yet ftill he feems to infinuate, that an Oath
only binds tofubjection, which Oath, as he would have us believe,
was at first arbitrary : whereas Subjects are bound to obey Mo-
narchs though they never take oath offubjection, as wel as children
are bound to obey their parents,though they never fwear to do it.
Next, his diſtinction between the rule ofpower, and the exercife
ofit,is vain ; for torule, is to exercife power: for himſelf faith,
thatGovernment is, poteftatis exercitium, the exerciſe ofa morall
power.
Laftly, whereas our Author faith, a Monarch cannot break his
promifewithoutfin : letme adde, that ifthe ſafety of the people,
faluspopuli, require a breach ofthe Monarchs promife, then the
fin, iftherebe any,is rather in the making, then breaking ofthepro-
mife, thefafety ofthe people is an exception implied in every Mo-
narchicall promife.
D
But
3.
P. 7.
P. I.


-18
The Anarchy of
P. 12.
P. 13.
P. 8.
But it feems theſe three degrees of Monarchy do not fatisfie
our Author, he is not content to have a Monarch have alaw or
rule togovernby,but he muſthave this limitation or law to be ab
externo,fromfomebody elſe, and notfrom the determination of the
Monarchs own will, and therefore he faith, by originall conftitution
the focietypublick confers on one man apower by limited contract, re-
figning themselves to begovernedbyſuch a law, alſo before he told
us, thefole means ofSoveraignty is the conſent andfundamentallcon-
tract, whichconfent puts them in their power, which can be no more
nor otherthen is conveyed to them by fuch contract ofſubjection. If
the fole means ofa limited Monarchy be the confent and funda-
mentall contract ofa Nation, how is it that he faith, A Monarch
may belimitedby aftercondifcent?is an after condifcent all one with
afundamentallcontract with originall and radicall conftitution ?
whyye : hetells us, it is afecundary originallconftitution, a fecun-
dary originall, that is, afecondfirft : And if that condifcentbe an
act ofgrace, doth not this condifcent to a limitation come from
the free determination ofthe Monarchs will ? If he either for
mally, or virtually ( as our Authorfuppofeth ) defert his abfolute
or arbitrary power whichhe hathbyconqueft, or otherright.
And ifit be fromthe free will of the Monarch, whydothhe
fay the limitation muſt be ab externo ? he told us before, that
Subjection cannot be diffolvedor leffen'd by an Act ofgrace comming
afterwards, but he hath better bethought himſelf, and now he
will have acts ofgrace to be oftwo kinds, andthe latterkindmay a-
mount( ashefaith ) to arefignation ofabfolute Monarchy. But can
any man believe that a Monarch who byconqueft or other right
hath an abfolute arbitrary power, will voluntarily refigne that
abfoluteneffe , and acceptfo much power only as the people fhall
pleaſe to give him, and fuch laws to govern by as theyfhall make
choice of? canhe fhew that ever any Monarch wasfo gratious or
kind-hearted as to lay down his lawfull power freely at his Sub-
jectsfeet
is it not fufficient grace if fuch an abfolute Monarchbe
content tofet down a law to himſelf by which he will ordinarily
govern,but he muſt needs relinquish his old independent commit
fion, & takea new one from his Subjects clog'd with limitations?
Finally, I obferve, that howfocver our Authorfpeak big ofthe
radicall, fundamentall, and originall power of the people as the
root
'A Limited or Mixed Monarchy.
19
root ofall Soveraignty:yet in a better moode he will takeup and
be contented with a Monarchy limited by an after condiſcent and
act ofgrace from the Monarch himſelf.
Thus I have briefly touched his grounds of Limited Monarchy ;
ifnow we ſhall aske, what proof or examples he hath to juſtifie
his doctrine, he is as mute as afiſh : only Pythagoras hath ſaid it,
and we muſt believe him, for though our Author would have Mo-
narchy to be limited, yet he could be content his opinion ſhould
be abfolute, and not limited to any rule or example.
The maine Charge I have againſt our Author now remaines
to be diſcuſſed, and it is this,That inſtead of a Treatiſe of Monar-
chy, he hath brought forth a Treatife of Anarchy, and that byhis
owneconfeffions fhall be made good.
First,heholds, A Limited Monarch tranfcends his bounds if he
commands beyond the law, and the Subject legally is not bound toſub-
jection infuch cafes.
Iconceive in
P. 17.
Now ifyou aske the Author who shall be judge, whether the
Monarch tranfcends his bounds, and ofthe exceffes of the fove-
raigne power. His anfwer is, There is an impoſſibility of conftitu-
p. 16.
ting ajudge to determine this laft controverfie
alimitedlegallMonarchy there can be no ſtated internall Judge of
the Monarchs actions, ifthere grow afundamentall variance betwixt
him andthe community
there can be no fudge legall and
constituted within that form ofgovernment. In theſe anſwers it ap-
pears,there is no Judge to determine the Soveraignes or the Mo-
narchs tranfgreffinghis fundamentall limits : yet our Author is
verycautelous, andfuppofeth onely a fundamentall variance be-
twixtthe Monarch and the Community, he is afhamed to put
the queſtion home. I demand ofhim if there be a variance be-
twixt the Monarch and any of themeaneſt perſon of the Com-
munity, who ſhall be the Judge? for inftance, The King com
´mands me, orgives judgment against me : I reply, Hiscommands
are illegall,and hisjudgment not according tolaw : who muft judge ?
ifthe Monarchhimſelfjudge, thenyoudeftroy theframe ofthe State,
andmakeit abfolute, faith our Author, and he gives his reaſon : for
to define a Monarch to a law, andthen to make himjudge ofhis owne
deviationsfrom that law isto abfolve himfrom alllaw. On the other
fide, ifany, or all thepeople mayjudge, thenyouput the Sovereignty
D2


20
The Anarchyof
P. 14.
P. 17.
P.49.
:
P. 17.
in thewholebody, orpart ofit, and destroy thebeing of Monarchy.
Thus our Author hath caught himſelfin a plaine dilemma : if the
Kingbe judge, then he is no limited Monatch.
If the peoplebe
judge, thenheis no Monarch at all.
So farewell limited No-
narchy, nayfarewell allgovernment iftherebe no Judge.
Would youknow what help our Author hath found out for
this miſchief? First, he faith, that a Subject is boundto yeildto a
Magiftrate,whenhe cannot, dejure, challenge obedience, ifit beina
thing in whichhe can poffibly withoutfubverfion, andin which his act
may not be made a leadingcafe, andfo bring on aprefeription againſt
publike liberty: Again, he faith, ifthe act inwhichthe exorbitance
or tranfgreffion ofthe Monarchisfuppofed ta be, be ofleſſermoment,
andnot ftriking at the very being ofthat Government,
it ought tobe
borne bypublick patience, rather then to endinger the being of the
State. The like words he ufes in another place, faying, ifthe will
ofthe Monarch exceed the limits ofthe law, it ought to beſubmitted
to, ſo it be not contrary to Gods law, nor bring with itſuchan evill to
ourfelves, or thepublick, that we cannot be acceſſary to it by obeying.
Thefe are but fig-leaves to cover the nakedneffe of our Authors
Limited Monarch formed upon weak fuppofals in cafes of leffer
moment. Forifthe Monarch be to govern only according to
law, no tranfgreffion ofhis can be offosmall moment ifhe break
thebounds of law, but it is a fubverfion ofthe government it felf,
and may be made a leading cafe, and fo bring on a prefcription
against publick liberty, it ſtrikes at the very being of the Govern
ment, and brings with it fuch an evill, as the party that fuffers, or
the publick cannot be acceffory to : let the cafe be never fo fmall ;
yet iftherebe illegality in the act, it strikes at thevery beingof
limitedMonarchy which is to be legall : unlefle our Author will
fay, as in effect he doth, That his limited Monarch muſtgoverne
accordingto law in great and publick matters onély, and that in
fmaller matters which concerne privatemen or poor perfons,he
mayrule according to his own will.
Secondly, ourAuthor tells us, ifthe Monarchs act ofexorbitan
cy or tranfgreffionbe mortall, andfuch asfuffered diffolves the frame
ofGovernment andpublickliberty, thenthe illegality is to befet oper
andredrefmentfought bypetition, which iffailingpreventionbyre-
fiftance oughtto be, and ifit be apparent and appeale be made to the
con-

ALimitedand Mixed Monarchy.
confciences ofmankind, then thefundamentalllaws ofthat Monarchy
must judge and pronounce the fentence in every mans conscience, and
every man (fofarre as concernes him) mustfollow the evidence of
Truth inhis ownfoul tooppofe or not to oppofe, according as be can in
confcience acquit or condemne the act ofthe governour or Monarch,
Whereas my Author requires, that the deftructive nature ofille
gallcommandsshouldbefet open : Surely his mind is, That each pri
vate man in his particular cafe fhould make a publique remon
ftrance to the world ofthe illegall act oftheMonarch , and then
ifupon his Petition he cannot be relieved, according to his defire,
he ought, orit is his duty to make reſiſtance. Here I would know,
who canbethejudge, whether the illegality be made apparent.;
it is a maine point, fince every man is prone to flatter himselfe in
his owne crufe, and to think it good, and that thewrong or inju
ftice he fufers is apparent, when other moderate and indifferent
mencan diſcover no fuch thing : and in this cafe the judgement of
the common people cannot be gathered orknown by any poffible
meanes ;or ifit could, it were like to be various and erronious.
P.18.
Yet ourAuthor will have an appeale made to the confcience ofall
Mankind, and that being made, he concludes, the fundamentall
Lawesmustjudge andpronouncefentence in every mans confcience.
Whereashe faith,The Fundamentall Lawes must judge , I would
verygladly learne ofhim, or ofany other for him, what a Funda-
mentall Law is, or elfe have but any one Law named me that any
man canfay is a Fundamentall Law ofthe Monarchy: I confeffe
he tells us, that the Common Lawes are thefoundation, and the Sta
tute Lawsarefuperftructive; yet I think he dares not fay that there
p. 38.
isany one branch or part ofthe Common Lawbut that it maybe
taken awayby an Act of Parliament : for many points of the
CommonLaw(defacto) have, and (dejure) any point may be ta-
ken away. How can that be called Fundamentall, which hath and
maybe removed, and yet the Statute Lawes ftand firme and fta
-ble? it iscontrary to the nature ofFundamental,for the building
to ftand whenthe foundation is taken away.
Befides,the Common Law is generally acknowledged to be no-
thing elfebut common ufage orcuftome, which by length oftime
onely obtaines authority : So that it followes in time after go-
vernment, but cannot goe before it, and be the rule to Govern-
D3
ment,


22
The Anarchy of
P. 18.
ment, by any originall or radicall conſtitution.
Alfo theCommon Law beingunwritten doubtful and difficult,
cannot but be an uncertaine rule to governe by, which is againſt
the nature ofa rule, which is and ought to be certaine.
Laftly, by making the Common Law onely to be the foundati
on, MagnaCharta is excluded from being a Fundamentall Law,
and alfo all other Statutes from being limitations to Monarchy,
fince theFundamentall Lawes onely are to be judge.
Trulytheconfcience of all Man-kind is a pretty large Tribunall
for the Fundamentall Lawes to pronounce fentence in. It is very
muchthat Lawes which in their owne nature are dumb , and al-
wayes need a Judge to pronounce fentence, fhould now be able
to ſpeak, & pronounce fentence themſelves : fuch a ſentence fure-
lymuſt be uponthe hearing ofone party onely, for it is impoffi
ble for a Monarchto make his defence and anfwer, and produce
his witneſſes, in every mans conſcience, in each mans cauſe , who
willbut queſtionthe legality ofthe Monarchs Government? Cer-
tainlythe fentence cannot but be unjuft, where but one mans tale
isheard. For all this the conclufion is , Every man must oppofe or
not oppofe the Monarchaccording to his owne confcience. Thus at the
laft, everyman is brought by this Doctrine of our Authors, to be
his ownejudge. And I alfo appeal to the confciences of all man-
kinde, whether the end ofthis be not utter confuſion, and A-
narchy.
Yet after all this, the Author faith,this power ofevery mansjudge
ing the illegall asts of the Monarch, argues not afuperiority of those
whojudge overhim, who isjudged; and he gives us a profound rea-
fon for it ; his words are, it is not authorative and civill, but morall
refiding in reasonable creatures, and lawful for them to execute.
What our Author meanes bytheſe words, (not authorative and
civill, but morall) perhaps I underſtand not, though Ithink I doe ;
yet it ferves my turne that he faith, that refiftance ought to be made,
andevery man must oppofe or not oppofe, according as in confcience he
can acquit or condemn the acts ofhis governour; for if it inable a man
to refift and oppofe his Governour, without queftion tis authora-
tive and civill, whereas he addes, that morall judgement isrefiding
inreafonable creatures, and lawfull for themto execute ; he feemes
toimply that authorative, and civill jndgement doth not refide
in


ALimited or Mixed Monarchy.
23
in reaſonable creatures, nor can be lawfully executed : Such a con-
clufion fits wellwith Anarchy,for he that takes away all Govern-
ment, and leaves every man to his owne confcience, and fo makes
him an Independent in State, may well teach that authority re-
fides not in reaſonable creatures, nor can be lawfully executed.
I paffe from his abfolute and limited Monarchy, to his divifion
or partition (forhe allowes no divifion) ofMonarchy intofimple
and mixed, viz. of a Monarch, the Nobility and Community.
Where firſt, obferve a doubt of our Authors, whether afirme
p. 25.
union can be inamixture ofequality, he rather thinks there must be a
priority oforder in one ofthe three, or else there can be no unity. He
muft knowthat priority oforder doth not hinder, but that there
maybe anequality of mixture ifthe fhares be equall, for he that
hath the firſt ſhare mayhaveno more then the others:ſo that ifhe
will have aninequality of mixture, a primity of fhare will not
fervethe turne : the firſt ſhare muſt be greater or better thenthe
others, or elſe they will be equall, and then he cannot call it a
mixed Monarchy where only a primity offhare in the Supream
power is in one : but by his own confeffion he may better call it
a mixed Ariftocracy or mixed Democracy, then a mixed Monar-
chy,fince he tells us, the Houses ofParliamentfurehave two parts
of the greatest legislative authority, and if the King have but a
third part,fure their fhares are equall.
The firft ftep our Author makes, is this, The foveraigne power
must be originally in allthree; nexthe finds, that if there be ane-
quality ofshares in three Eftates, there can be no ground to denomi-
nate a Monarch, and then his mixed Monarch might be thought
but an emptytitle : Therefore in the third place he refolves us,
that tofalve all, Apower must befought out wherewith the Monarch
must beinvested , which is notfogreat as to deftroy the mixture, nor
fo titular as to deftroy the Monarchy, and therefore he conceives it
maybeintheſe particulars.
First,a Monarchin a mixed Monarchy may befaidto be aMonarch
(as he conceives) ifhe be the head & fountain ofthe power which go-
verns& executes the establishedLaws,that is, a man may be a Mo-
narch though he doe but give power to others to govern and exe-
cutethe eſtabliſhed Laws, thus he brings his Monarch one ſtep or
peg lowerftill then he was before : at firft he made us believe his
Monarch
P.56
P.25.
P. 26,

24
TheAnarchyof
P. 38.
Monarch should have the Supream power, which is the legislas
tive ; thenhe falls from that, and tells us, A limited- Monarch
multgovernaccording to law onely ; thus he is brought from the
legiflative to the gubernative or executive power only ; nordoth
he ftay here, butis taken a hole lower, for nowhe muſt not go-
vern, but he must conftitute Officers to govern by laws ; if chufing
Officers to govern be governing, then our Author will allow his
Monarch to be a Governour, not elfe : and therefore he that di
vided Supream power into legislative and gubernative, doth now
divide it into legislative and power ofconftituting Officers for go-
verningby Laws, and this he faith is left tothe Monarch. Indeed
youhave left him a faire portion of power, but are we fure he
may enjoythis ? it feems our Author is not confident in this nei
ther, and fome others doe deny it him : our Author ſpeaking of
the government ofthis Kingdome, faith, The choice ofthe Officers
is intrufted tothe judgement of the Monarch for ought I know, he
is not refolute in the point, but for ought he knows ; and for
ought I know his Monarch is but titular, an empty title, certaine
ofno power at all.
The power of chufing Officers only,is the baſeſt of all powers ;
Aristotle ( as I remember ) faith, The common people are fitfor no
thing but tochufe Officers, and to take accompts : and indeed, in all
populargovernments the multitude perform this work : and this
work ina King puts him below all his Subjects, and makes him
the onely Subject in a Kingdome, or the onely man that cannot
Govern : there is not the pooreftman of the multitude but is
capable of fome Office or other, and by that means may fome.
time or other perhaps govern according to the laws, onely the
Kingcan be no Officerbut to chufe Officers, his Subjects may all
Governe, buthe may not.
Next, I cannot fee how in true fenfe our Author can fay, his
Monarchisthe head, andfountain ofpower, fince his doctrine is,
that in a limitedMonarchy, thepublickfociety by originall conftitu
tion confer ononemanpower, is not then the publick fociety the
head and fountain ofpower, and not the King?
Again, whenhe tels us ofhis Monarch, that both the other States
as well conjunctim as divifim behisfwornfubjects, and owe obedience
tohiscommands : hedoth but flout his poor Monarch, for why
arc
A Limited and Mixed Monarchy.
25
are they called his Subjects and his Commons ? he (without any
complement) is their Subject, for they as Officers, may governe
and command according to Law: but he may not, forhe nut
judge by his judges in Courts ofJustice onely : that is, he may
notjudge orgoverne at all.
2. As forthe fecond particular,thefole or chiefepower in capacita-
tingperfonsfor the Surpeamepower.
And
3. As to this third particular,the power ofconvocatingfuchperfons,
they are both fo far frommaking a Monarch, that they are the
onlyway to make him none, by choofing and calling others to
fhare inthe Supreame power.
4. Laftly,concerning his Authority being the laft andgreatest inthe
eftablishing every Act, It makes him no Monarch, except he be
fole that hath that Authority : neither his primity ofſhare in the
Supreame power, nor his Authority being laft, no, nor his having
the greatest Authority doth makehim a Monarch, unleſſe he have
that Authority alone.
Befides,how canhe fhew that in his mixed Monarchy the Mo-
narchs power is the greatest ? The greateſt ſhare that our Author
allowes him inthe legiſlative power is a negative voice, and the
like is allowed tothe Nobility and Commons : And truly a ne-
gative voice is but a baſe tearme to expreffe a Legiſlative power,
a Negative voice isbut a privative power, orindeed no power at
all to do anything, onely apower tohinder an A&
tfrom being
done.
Wherefore I conclude not any of his four, nor all ofthem put
into one person makes the ſtate Monarchicall.
This mixed Monarchy juſt like the limited ends in confuſion &
deſtruction of all Government :you fhall hear the Authors confef-
fion: That one inconvenience must neceffarily be in all mixed Govern-
ments,which Ifhewedto be inlimitedGovernmets,there canbe no con-
ftituted legallAuthorativeJudge ofthefundamentall controverfies ari-
fingbetween the three Estates : Iffuch do riſe it isthefatalldiſeaſe
ofthofe Governmentsfor which nofalve can be applied. It is acafe
beyond the poffible provifion offuch a Government, ofthis queſtion
there is no legall judge . The accufing fide muft make it evident to
every mans conſcience
-the appeale must be to the communi-
ty, as iftherewere no Government, and as by evidence conſciences are
E
con
P. 26.
P. 28,


26
The Anarchy of
convinced they are bound to give their affiftance. The wit ofman
cannot fay more for Anarchy.
Thushave I picked out the flowers out of his Doctrine about
limited Monarchy, and preſented them with fome briefAnnota-
tions, it were a tedious worke to collect all the learned contra-
dictions, and ambiguous expreffions that accurin every page of
his platonique Monarcy, the booke hath fo much offancy that it
is a better piece ofPoetry then Policy.
Becauſe many may thinke that the maine doctrine oflimited
and mixed Monarchy may in it felf be moſt authenticall and
grounded upon ftrong and evident reafon ; although our Author
perhaps have failed in fome of his expreffions, and beliable to
exceptions. Therefore I will be bold to enquirewhether Ariftotle
could find either reaſon or example of a limitedor mixedMonar-
chy , andthe rather becauſe I find our Author altogether inſiſts
upon a rationall way of juſtifying his opinion. No man I thinke
will deny but that Ariftotle was fufficiently curious in ſearching
out the feverall formes of Common-wealths and Kingdomes,
yet I do not find that he ever fo much as dreamed of either a li
mited ormixed Monarchy : Severall other forts of Monarchies
he reckons up. In the third booke of his Politiques he ſpends
three whole Chapters together upon the feverall kindes of Mo-
narchy.
First, in his fourteenth Chapter he mentions four kindes of
Monarchy.
The Laconique or Lacedemonian.
The Barbarique.
The Afmneticall.
The Heroique.
The Laconique or Lacedemonian King ( faith he) hadonly Su-
preame power when he was out of the bounds ofthe Lacedemonian
territories, then he had abfolute power, his Kingdome was like to a
perpetuall LordGenerall ofan Army.
The Barbarique King(faith Ariftotle) had apowerveryneereto
tyranny, yetthey were lawfull andpaternall, because the Barbarians
are ofa morefervile nature then theGrecians, and the Asiatiques
then the Europeans, they do willingly without repining live undera
Masterly

ALimitedand Mixed Monarchy.
27
masterly Government,yet theirgovernment is ftable, andſafe becauſe
they arepaternall andlawfull Kingdomes, and theirguardes are Roy-
allandnot tyrannicall,for Kings areguarded by their owne Subjects,
andTyrants areguarded byftrangers.
The Afymneticall King (faith Arift.) in oldtime in Greece, was
an elective Tyrant, and differed only from the Barbarian Kings in
that he was elective and not paternall, theſe forts ofKings becauſe
theywere tyrannicall were Masterly : but because they were over
fuchas voluntarily electedthem they were Regall.
The Heroique were thefe (faith Ariftotle) whichflourished in the
beroicall times, to whom the people did willingly obey, and theywere
paternall and lawfull, becauſe theſe Kings did deferve well ofthe
multitude either by teaching them arts, or by warringfor them, or by
gathering them together when they were diſperſed , or by dividing
Landsamongst them: Thefe Kings had Supreame power in war,inſa-
crifices, infudicature.
Thefe four forts of Monarchy hath Ariftotle thus diftingui-
fhed, and after fummes them up together, and concludes his
Chapter as ifhehad forgot himſelf, and reckons up a fift kind of
Monarchy, which is faith he, when one alone hath Supreame power
ofall the reft, for as there is a domefticall Kingdome ofone house,
fo the Kingdomeofa City, orofoneor many Nations is afamily.
Theſe are all the forts ofMonarchy that Ariftotle hath found
out, and he hath ſtrained hard to make them ſo many : Firſt for
his Lacedemonian King,himſelfe confeffeth that he was but a kind
ofmilitaryCommander in war, and fo in effect no more a King
then all Generals ofArmies : And yet this No-King ofhis was
not limited by any Law, nor mixed with any companions ofhis
Government, when he was in the wars out of the confines of
Lacedemon,he was as Ariftotle ftiles him AvTongatae,offull and ab-
folate command, no Law, no companion to govern his Army but
his ownewill.
Next for Ariftotles Æfymneticall King, it appears he was out
ofdate in Ariftotles time, for he faith, hewas amongst the ancr-
ent Greekes ἐν τοῖς ἀρχαίοις Έλλησιν. Αriftotle might well have fpa-
red the naminghim (ifhe had not wanted other forts) forthe
honour of his owne Nation : for he that but now told usthe
Barbarianswere ofa more fervile nature thenthe Gracians,comes
E 2
here


28
The Anarchy of
here and tels us that thefe old Greeke Kings were elective tyrants.
The Barbarians did but fuffer tyrants in fhew,but the old Gracians
chooſe tyrants indeed : which then muſt we thinke were the grea-
ter flaves, the Greeks or the Barbarians ? Now if theſe forts of
Kings were tyrants, we cannot fuppofe they were limited either
byLaw, orjoyned with companions : Indeed Arift. faith fome
oftheſe tyrants were limited to certaine times and actions, for
they had not all their power for terme of life, nor could meddle
but in certaine bufineffes, yet during the time they were tyrants,
and in the actions whereto they were limited, they had abfolute
power to do what they lilt, according to their owne will, or elfe
they could not have been faid to be tyrants.
As for Ariftotles Heroicke King,hegives the like note upon him
that he did upon
the
fymnet ,
that he was in old time
XT TO ngwin's
eves in the heroick times. The thing that made
thefe heroicall Kingdomes differ from other forts of Kingdomes,
was onlythe meanes by which the firft Kings obtained their King-
domes, and not the manner of Government, for in that they
were as abfolute as other Kings were without either limitation
by law, or mixture ofcompanions.
Laſtly as for Arift. Barbariche fort of Kings, fince he reckoned
all the world Barbarians except the Grecians, his Barbaricke King
muft extend to all other forts of Kings in the world, befides thoſe
ofGreece, and fo may go under Ariftotles fift fort ofKings,which
in generall comprehends all other forts, and is no ſpeciall forme
ofMonarchy.
Thus upon a true accompt it is evident that the five ſeverall
forts of Kings, mentioned by Ariftotle are at the moſt but diffe-
rent, and accidentall meanes of the first obtaining or holding of
Monarchies ; and not reall or effentiall differences ofthe manner
of Government, which was alwayes abfolute, without either li-
mitation or mixture.
I may be thought perhaps to miſtake, or wrong Ariftotle in
queftioninghis diverfities ofKings : but it feemes Ariftotle him-
felfe was partly ofthe fame minde, for in the very next Chapter
whenhe hadbetter confidered of the point, he confeffed that to
peake the truth, there were almoft but twoforts ofMonarchies worth
the confidering, that is hisfirft or Laconiquefort, and his fift or laft
fort


A Limited or Mixed Monarchy.
29
fort where one alone hath Supreame power over all the reft : thus he
hath brought his five forts to two. Now for the firft of theſe two,
his Lacedemonian King he hath confeffed before, that he was no
more then a Generaliſſime ofan Army, and fo upon the mater no
King at all ; and then there remaines onely his laftfort of Kings,
where one alonehath the Supreame power. And this in fubftance is
the finall reſolution of Ariftotle himſelf, for in his fixteenth Chap-
ter where he delivers his laſt thoughts touching the kindes of Mo-
narchy, he firſtdiſchargeth his Laconick King from being any fort
ofMonarchy: and then gives us two exact rules about Monarchy,
and both theſe are point blanke againſt limited and mixed Mo-
narchy , therefore I fhall propofe them to be confidered of,
as concluding all Monarchy to be abfolute and arbitrary.
c. 16.
1.Theone rule is,that he that isſaid to be aKing according to Law, Ariſt. pol.l.31
is no fort ofgovernment or Kingdome at all :
'O x voμor Caaneus'
ἐκ ἐςὶν εἶδΘ πολοςείας.
2. Thefecond rule is,that a true King is he that ruleth all accor-
dnig to his own will, και την αυτε βέλησιν.
This latterfrees aMonarch from the mixture ofpartners or
fharers in government, as the former rule doth from limitation
by lawes.
Thusinbriefe I have traced Ariftotle in his crabbed and broken
paffages touching diverfities of Kings, where first he findes but
four forts, and then he ftumbles upon a fift,and in the next Chap-
ter contents himselfe onely with two forts of Kings, but inthe
Chapterfollowing concludes with one, which is the true perfect
Monarchwho rules all by his own will : In all this we find no-
thingfor a regulated or mixed Monarchy, but againſt it.
Moreover whereas the Author of the treatife of Monarchy
affirmes it as a prime principle that all Monarchies(except that of
thefewes) depend upon humane defignment, when the conſent ofafo-
ciety ofmen, and afundamentall contract of a Nation, by originall
ar radicallconftitution confers power. He mustknow that Arift. fear-
ching into the originall of government fhewes himſelfe in this
point a better Divine then our Author, and as if he had ſtudied
the book ofGenefis,teacheth that Monarchies fetch their petigree
from the right of fathers, and not fromthe gift or contract of
people, his words may thus be engliſhed. Atthefirst Cities were
E 3
Govern-


30
The Anarchy of
Governed by Kings, andfo even to this day are Nations also : for
fuch aswereunder Kingly Government did come together, for every
houfe isgovernedby a King who is the eldest, andfo alfo Colonies are
governed for kindredfake. And immediately before he tels us that
the first Society made of many houses is a village, which naturally
feemes to be a Colonie of a house, whichfome cal fofterbrethren, or
Children, andChildrens Children.
So in conclufionwe have gained Ariftotles judgement in three
maine, and eſſentiall points.
1.A King according to Law makes no kind ofGovernment.
2. AKingmust rule according to his own will.
3. The originall ofKings, isfrom the right ofFatherhood.
What Ariftotlesjudgement was two thousand years fince, is a-
greeable to the doctrine of the great modern politician Bodin :
Heare him touching limited Monarchy ; Unto Majesty or Sove-
raignty (faith he) belongeth an abfolute power not fubject to any
Law
chief power given unto aPrince with condition isnot
properly Soveraignty
or power abfolute :
Except fuch conditions
annexed tothe Sovereignty , be directly comprehended within the laws
ofGod andnature.
Albeit by the fufferance ofthe Kingof
England, controverfies between the King andhis people arefometimes
determined by the high Court ofParliament, andfometimes by the
Lord ChiefJustice of England : yet allthe eftatesremaine infullfub-
jection to the King, who isno wayes bound tofollowtheir advise, nei
ther toconfent totheirrequests.
It is certaine that the lawes,
priviledges, andgrants of Princes have no force but during their
life, ifthey be not ratified by the expreffe confent, or bysufferance of
Much leffe
the Prince following, especially Priviledges.
fhould a Prince be bound unto the Laws he maketh himſelf, for aman
may wellreceive a Lawfrom an other man, but impoſſible it is in na-
turefor togive a Law unto himself, no more then it is to command
amansfelfin a matter depending of his owne will. The Law faith,
Nulla obligatio confifterepoteft, qua à voluntate promittentisftatum
capit. The Soveraigne Prince may derogate unto the laws that he
hathpromiſedandfworn to keep, if the equity thereof be ceaſed, and
the Ma-
that ofhimself without the confent of hisfubjects,
jesty ofa true Soveraigne Prince is to be known when the eftates
of all the people affembled in allhumility present theirrequests and
Sup


A Limited or MixedMonarchy.
3x
fupplications to their Prince, without having powerin any thing to
command, determine or give voice, but that that which it pleafeth
the King tolike, or diflike, to command or bid is holdenfor Law:
wherein theywhich have written ofthe duty ofMagiftrates have de-
ceived themſelves in maintaining that the power ofthepeople isgrea-
ter then the Prince : a thing which cauſeth oft trueſubjects to revolt
from theirobedience to their Prince, and miniftreth matter ofgreat
troubles in Common- wealths, ofwhich their opinion there is neither
reafon nor ground, for ifthe King beſubject unto the aſſemblies and
decrees of thepeople, heſhould neither be King nor Soveraigne, and
the Common-wealth neither Realme nor Monarchy, but ameer Ari-
ftocracy
Sowefee the principallpoint ofSoveraigne Majesty
andabfolute powerto confift principally in givingLaws unto the Sub-
jectsingenerallwithout their confent. Bodin de Rep. l. 1. c. 8.
To confound theftate of Monarchy, with the popular or Arifto-
craticall eftate is a thing impoffible, and in effect incompatible, and
fuch ascannot be imagined for Sovereignty being ofitfelfindiviſible,
howcan it at one andthe fame time be dividedbetwixt one Prince,
the Nobility, and the people in Common ? Thefirst marke ofSove-
raigne Majestyisto be ofpower togive Laws, andto commandover
them unto the fubjects, and who ſhould thoſeſubjects be thatſhould
Jeild their obedience to the Law , if theyshouldhave also powerto
make the Laws ? who should he be that could give the Law ? being
himself constrained toreceive it ofthem unto whom himſelfgave it?
fo that ofneceffity we must conclude, that as no one inparticular hath
thepower to make the Law inſuchaſtate, that then theſtate must
needs be aftate popular.
Never any Common-wealth bath
been made ofan Ariftocracie,andpopular eftate,much leſſe afthe thres
eftates of aCommon-Weal
-fuch states wherein the rights of
Sovereigntyare divided, are not rightly to becalled Common-Weals,
but rather the corruption ofCommon-Weals, as Herodotus has moſt
breify, but trulywritten
Common-wealeswhich changetheir
fate, the Soveraigne right and power ofthem being dividedfind no
restfrom Civil wars and broiles,
till they againerecoverfome one of
the threeformes, and the Soveraignty be wholyin one oftheftates or
other
Where the rights of the Soveraignty are divided be-
wixt the Prince and his Subjects, in that confufion offtate there is
ftill endleffeftirsandquarrelsfor thefuperiority, untill thatſome one,
Loma


-32
The Anarchy of
Somefew or altogether have got the Soveraignty. Id. lib. 2. c. 1.
This Judgment of Bodins touching Limited and Mixed Monar-
chy is not according to the mind of our Author, nor yet of the
Obfervator, who uſeth the ftrength ofhis wit to overthrow Ab-
folute and Arbitrary Government in this Kingdome, and yet in
the main body ofhis difcourfe lets fall fuch truths from his pen
as give a deadly wound to the Caufehe pleadsfor, ifthey be in
differently waighed and confidered, I will not pick a line or two
here and there to wreſt againſt him, but will preſent a whole
Page of his Book, or more together, that fo we may have an en-
tire profpect upon the Obfervators mind, without fociety ( faith
the Obfervator) men couldnot live, Without Laws men couldnot be
fociable ; and without Authority Somewhere to judge according to
Law, Law was vaine : It wasfoone therefore provided, that Lans
according tothedictate ofreaſonſhould be ratified by common con-
fent ; when it afterward appeared, that man was yetſubject to unna-
turalldistraction by the tyranny ofentrusted Magiſtrates, a miſchief
almost asfatall as to be without all Magistracy. How to provide a
wholfomeremedy therefore was notfo eafie to beinvented, it was not
difficult to invent Lawsfor thelimiting of Supream Governors, but
to invent how those lawsshouldbe executed, or bywhom interpreted,
Was almoft impoffible, Nam quis Cuftodiet ipfos Cuftodes, to place
a Superior above a Supream was held unnaturall ; yet what a life-
leffe thingwould Law be without any fudge to determine and force
it ? If it be agreed upon, that limits should be prefixed to Princes and
Judges to decree according to thofe limits, yet an other inconvenience.
willprefently affront us : for we cannot reftrain Princes toofar, bat
we shalldif-able themfrom fome goot : long it was ere the world
couldextricate itfelfe out ofall thefe extremities, or find out an or-
derlymeans whereby to avoid the danger of unbounded Prerogative
on this hand, and to exceffive liberty onthe other, andſcarce has long
experience yetfullysatisfied the minds ofall menin it. Inthe Infan-
sy ofthe world when man was not ſo artificiall and obdurate in cra
elty andoppreffion as now, and policy most rude. Most Nations did.
chufe rather to fubject themselves to the meer difcretion of their
Lords, then rely upon any limits, an
'ſo be ruled by Arbitrary E-
dicts thenwritten Statutes. But fince tyranny beingmore exquifite,
andpolicy more perfect,
especially where learning and Religion flou-
rifa


ALimited or Mixed Monarchy.
33
rish,few Nations will endure the thraldome which usually accompa
nies unboundedand unconditionate Royalty : Yet long it was erethe
bounds and conditions ofSupream Lords wasfo wifely determined or
quietly conferved as now they are : for atfirst when as Euphori, Tri-
buni, Curatores, &c. were erected to poife against the feale ofSove-
raignty, much blood was shed about them, andStates wereput into
new broiles by them, andfome places the remedy provedworse then the
difeafe . In allgreat diftreffes the body ofthe people were ever conftrai-
nedto rife, andbyforce ofthe Majorparty to put an end to all inte-
fineftrifes, and make aredreſſe ofall publikegrievances : But many
times calamitiesgrewto astrange height beforefo cumbersome a body
couldberaised, and when it was raised, the motions ofit werefo di-
Atracted and irregular, that after much spoile and effufion ofblood,
fometimes only one tyranny was exchanged for another : tillfome was
invented to regulate the motions ofthe peoples molimenous body. I
think arbritrary rule wasmostfafefor the World: But Nowfince most
Countries havefound an art andpeaceable orderfor publick Affem-
blies, whereby thepeoplemay affume its ownepowertodo itfelfe right
without disturbance to it felf or injury to Princes : He is very un-
juft that wil oppofe this art or order.ThatPrinces may not be Now be-
yond all limits and laws, noryet to betied upon thofe limits by any pri-
vateparties : The whole community in its underived Majesty shall
convene todojustice, and that the convention may not be without intel-
ligence, certaine times andplaces, andformes, fhall be appointedfor it
reglement, andthat the vastneffe ofits own bulke may not breedcon-
fufion, by vertue ofelection andrepreſentation, afewſhall actfor ma-
ny, the wife fhall confentfor the fimple,
the vertue of all ſhall re-
dound tofome, and the prudence offome ſhall redound to all : andfure-
ly as this admirably compofed Court which is now calleda Parliament,
is moreregularly and orderly formed then when it was calledmickle
Synod of Wittena-gemot, or when this reall body ofthe people did
throng together at it : So it is not yet perhaps without fomedefts
which by art andpolicy might receivefarther amendment : Some di-'
vifions havesprung up of late between both Houses, andfome between'
the Kingand both Houses by reafon of incertainty ofjuriſdiction, and
fome Lawyers doubt how far the Parliament is able to createnew
formes andprecedents, and has ajurisdiction over itſelf: All these
doubtswould befolemnlyfolved : But in the first place the true privi-
ledges ofParliament belonging not only to the being and efficacy ofit,
•
F
but


34
The Anarchy of
but to the honor andcomplement ofit would be clearly declared, for the
very naming ofpriviledges ofParliament, asifthey were chimeras to
the ignorantfort, and utterly unknown unto the learned, bath been en-
tertained withfeorne fince the beginning ofthis Parliament.
In this large paffage taken out of the Obfervator which con-
cernes the originall of all Government, two notable Propofitions
may be principally obferved.
Firft,our Obfervator confeffeth arbitrary or abſolutegovernment
to be thefirft, and thefafeftgovernment for the world.
Secondly, he acknowledgeth that thejurisdiction is uncertaine
andthe priviledges not cleerelydeclared oflimited Monarchy.
Thele two evident truths delivered by him, he labours mainely
to difguife. He feemes to infinuate that arbitrary Government was
but in the infancy oftheWorld, for fo he termes it, but ifwe en-
quire ofhim, how longhe will have this infancy oftheworld to
laft , he grants it continued above three thousand years, which is
an unreasonable time for the world to continue under age : for
the first oppofers he dothfind of arbitrary powerwere the epho
ri, tribuni, curatores, &c. The ephari were above three thoufand
years after the Creation, and thetribuni were later ; as forhis
curatores I know not whom he meanes, except the Masterofthe
Court ofWards. I cannot English the word curator better. I doe
not believe that he can fhew that any curatores or et cæteras which
he mentions were fo ancient as the ephori. As for the tribuni he
miſtakes muchifhe thinkes they were erected to limit andbound
Monarchy, for the ſtate of Rome was at the leaft Ariftocraticall
(as they call it) ifnot popular,when tribunes of thepeople were firſt
hatched. Andfor the Epkori, their power did not limit or regu
late Monarchy,but quite take it away; for a Lacedemonian King in
the judgement ofAriftotle was no Kingindeed, but in name ontly, as
Generaliffimo of an Army , and the best politicians reckon the
Spartan Common-wealth to have been Ariftocraticall and not
Alonarchicall, and if a limited Monarchy cannot be found in La-
redemon, I doubt our Obfervator will hardly find it any where elfe
in the wholeWorld ; and infubftance he confeffeth as much when
he faith,Nowmost Countries havefound out an art andpeaceableor-
der for publique Affemblies, as ifit were a thing but new done,
and not before, for fothe word Now doth import.
The obfervator in confeffingthefurisdiction to be incertaine and
the


A Limitedand Mixed Monarchy.
35
the priviledges undetermined ofthat Court that should bound and li-
mit Monarchy, doth in effect acknowledge there is no fuch Court
at all : for every Court confifts of Jurifdictions and Priviledges,
it is theſe two that create a Court, and are the effentials ofit : If
the admirably compofed Court ofParliament havefome defects which
may receive amendment, as he faith, and if thofe defects befuch as
canfe divifions both between the Honfes, andbetween the Kingand
bothHonfes,and theſe divifions be about fo maine a matter as furif-
dictions, andPriviledges, andpower to create new Priviledges,
all
which are the fundamentals ofevery Court, (for untill they be
agreed upon, the act of every Court may not onely be uncertaine,
but invalid, and caufe of tumults and fedition :) And ifall thefe
doubts && divifions have need to befolemnlyfolved,as our Obfervator
confeffeth : Then he hath no reafon at all to fay that Nowthe
conditions ofSupreamLords are wifely determined andquietly confer-
ved, orthat Now moft Countries havefoundout an art, andpeacea
ble orderforpublick affaires, whereby thepeople mayrefume its own
power to do it felfright without injurie unto Princes, for how
can the underived Majefty ofthepeople byaffuming its ownpower,
tell how todo her felfe right, or how toavoid doing injury to the
Prince,ifherjurisdiction beuncertain, and Priviledges undetermined?
He tels usNow moft Countries havefound an art, andpeaceable
orderforpublick Affemblies:and to the intent, that Princes may not be
Now beyond all limits and Laws, the whole community in tis unde-
rived Majeftyshall convene to do fuftice. But he doth not name fo
much as one Country or Kingdome that hath found out this art,
where the whole Community in its underived Majeſty did ever
convene to do Juftice. I challenge him or any other for him to
name but one Kingdome that hath either Now or heretofore
found out this art or peaceable order ; We do hear a great ru-
mor in this age ofmoderated andlimited Kings, Poland, Sweden,
and Denmarkare talked offor fuch ; and in thefe Kingdomes, or
no where is fuch a moderated Government, as our Obfervator
meanes, to be found . A little enquiry would be made into the
mannerof the Government of thefe Kingdomes, for thefe Nor-
thern people, as Bodin obferveth, breathe after liberty.
Firſt for Poland, Boterusfaith, that the Government ofit, is ele-
Stivealtogether,andreprefenteth rather an Ariftocracie then a King-
dome : the Nobility who have great authority in the Diets, chufing
F2
the


36
The Anarchy of
the King, andlimiting His Authority, making His Sovereignty but
aflavish Royalty: thefe diminutions of regality began first by de-
fault of KingLewis, and Jagello, who to gaine thefucceffion in the
Kingdome contrary to the Laws, onefor his daughter, and the other
for hisfon, departed with many of his Royalties andprerogatives, to
buy the voices ofthe Nobility. The French Author ofthe book cal-
led the Eftates ofthe world, doth informe us that the Princes Au-
thoritywasmorefree,not beingfubject to any Laws ,and having Abfo-
lute Power, not onely oftheir eftates, but also oflife, and death : Since
Chriftian Religion was received, it began to be moderated,first by be
ly admonitions of the Bishops andClergy : andthen byfervices ofthe
Nobility inWar:
Religious Princes gave many Honours , and many
Liberties tothe Clergy and Nobility, and quit much of their Rights,
the which their fucceffors have continued. The fuperiour dignity
is reduced to two degrees ,
that is ,
the Palatinate and the Cha-
ftelleine , for that Kings in former times did by little andlittle
call these men to publike confultations , notwithstanding that they
badabfolutepower to do all things ofthemselves, to command, difpofe,
recompence andpunish of their own motions : fince, they have ordained
that thefe dignitiesfhould make the boly of a Senate. The King doth
not challenge much right andpower over His Nobil ty, nor over their
estates, neither hath he any overthe Clergy. And though the Kings
Authority depends on the Nobilityfor His election, yet in many things
it is abfolute afterhe He ischofen: He appoints the Diets at what
time and place Hepleafeth, He choofeth Lay Councelors, and nomi-
nates the Bishops and whom He willhave to be His Privy Counſel":
He is abfolute difpofer ofthe Revenews ofthe Crown : He is abfolute
establisher ofthe decrees ofthe Diets : it is in His power to advance,
and reward whom He pleafeth Heis Lord immediate ofHis Sub-
jects, but not ofHis Nobility : He is Soveraigne Judge ofHis Nobi-
Ity in criminall caufes. The power ofthe Nobility daily encreaſeth,
for that in respect of the Kings election they neither have law, rule,nor
forme to do it, neither bywriting nor tradition. As the Kinggoverns
His Subjects which are immediately. His with abfolute Authority , fo
the Nobility difpofe immediately oftheir vaſſals, over whom every one
hath more then aregall power, so as they entreat them like flaves,
There becertaine men in Poland who arecalledEARTHLY MES
SENGERS or Nuntios,they are as itwere Agents offurifdictions.or
circles ofthe Nobility : these have a certaine Authority, and as Bo-
terus
A Limited and Mixed Monarchy.
37
:
terus faith, in the time oftheir Diets these men aſſemble in aplace
neer to the Senate Houfe, where they choose two Marshals by Whom
(but witha tribune-like authority) theyfignifie unto the Counſellwhat
their requests are. Not longfince their authority andreputationgrew.
fo mightily , that they now carry themselves as heads andgovernours,
rather then officers and minifters of the publike decrees ofthe State
One ofthe Counfell refuſed his Senators place to become one oftheſe
officers. Every Palatine, the King requiring it cals together all the
Nobility ofHis Palatinate, where having propounded unto themthe
matters whereon they are totreate, and their willbeing known, they
choose four orfix out of the company ofthe EARTHLY MESSEN-
GERS, thefe deputies meet and make one body, which they call
the order of Knights.
Thisbeing of late years the manner and order of the govern-
ment ofPoland,it is not poffible for the Obfervator to find among
them that the whole community in its underived
Majefty doth
ever convene to do fuftice : nor any election or repreſentation of
the Community, or that the people affume its owne power to do
it felfright . The EARTHLY MESSENGERS though they may
be thought to reprefent the Commons, and oflate take much up-
onthem, yet they are elected and chofen by the Nobility as their
agents and officers. The Community are either vaffals to the
King, ortothe Nobility, and enjoy as little freedome or liberty.
as any Nation. But it may be faid perhaps, that though the Com-
munity do not limit the King, yet the Nobility do, and fo heis
a limited Monarchy . The Antwer is, that in truth though the No-
bility at the choofing of their King do limit his power, and do.
give him an oath : yet afterwards they have alwayes a defire to
pleaſe him and to fecond his will, and this they are forced to do
to avoid difcord, for by reafon of their great power they are
fubject to great diffentions, not only among themselves, but be-
tween them and the order of Knights which arethe earthly mef
fengers : yeathe Provinces are at difcord one with another : and
as for Religion, the diverſity of Sects in Polandbred perpetuall
jars and hatred among the people, there beingas many Sects as in
Amfterdam it felf, or any popular government can defire. The
danger of fedition is the cauſe, that though the Crown depends
on the election ofthe Nobility ; yet they have never rejected the
Kings fucceffour, or transferred the Realme to any other family
F3
but


38
The Anarchy of
but once, when depofing Ladislaus for his idleneffe (whom yet
afterward they reſtored)they elected Wencelaus King ofBohemia.
But ifthe Nobility do agree to hold their King to his conditions,
which is not to conclude any thingbut by the advife of his Coun
fell ofNobles, nor to chooſe any wife without their leaves, then
it must be faid to be aCommon-weal, not a Royalty, and the
Kingbut only the mouth ofthe Kingdome, or as Queen Chrifti-
na complained that Her Husbandwas but the shadow ofa Sove-
raigne.
Next, if it be conſidered how the Nobility of Polandcame to
this great power; it was not by any originall contract, orpopular
convention, for it is faid they haveneither Law, rule norforme writ-
ten or unwritten for the election oftheir King ; they may thanke
the Biſhops and Clergy : for by their holy admonitions and ad-
vife, good and Religious Princes to fhew their piety were firſt
brought to give much oftheir Rights and Priviledges to their Sub-
jects, devout Kings were meerely cheated offome oftheir Royalties.
What power foever generall Affemblies of the Eftates claime, or
exercife over and abovethe bare naked act of Counſelling, they
were firſt beholding to the Popish Clergy for it : it is theyfirft
brought Parliaments into requeſt and power : I cannot find in
any Kingdome but onely where Popery hath been, that Parlia
ments have been ofreputation,and in the greateſt times of Super-
ftition they are first mentioned.
As forthe Kingdome ofDenmarke I read that the Senators who
are all chofen out of the Nobility, and ſeldome exceed the num-
ber of 28, with the cheif of the Realme do chooſe their King.
Theyhave alwaies in a manner fet the Kings eldeſt Son uponthe
Royall Throne. The Nobility of Denmarke withſtood the Coro-
nation ofFrederick 1559, till he ſware not to put anyNoble man
to death untill he werejudged ofthe Senat, & that all Noble men
ſhould have power of life and death over their Subjects without
appeal, and the King to give no office without confent ofthe
Councell. There is a Chancelour of the Realme before whom
theydo appealfrom all the Provinces and Iſlands, and from him
to the King himfelfe. I hear of nothing in this Kingdome that
tends to popularity ; no Aflembly ofthe Commons, no elections,
or repreſentation ofthem.
Sweden isgoverned by a King heretofore elective,but now made
here-
