
the law of nations


natural law and
enlightenment classics
Knud Haakonssen
General Editor


Emer de Vattel



uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
natural law and
enlightenment classics
The Law of Nations,
Or, Principles of the Law of Nature,
Applied to the Conduct and Affairs
of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three
Early Essays on the Origin and Nature
of Natural Law and on Luxury
Emer de Vattel
Edited and with an Introduction
by Be´la Kapossy and Richard Whatmore
liber ty f u nd
Indianapolis


This book is published by Liberty Fund, Inc., a foundation established to
encourage study of the ideal of a society of free and responsible individuals.
The cuneiform inscription that serves as our logo and as the design motif
for our endpapers is the earliest-known written appearance of the word
“freedom” (amagi), or “liberty.” It is taken from a clay document written
about 2300 b.c. in the Sumerian city-state of Lagash.
Introduction, annotations, translations, bibliographies, index
 2008 by Liberty Fund, Inc.
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
c
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
p
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Frontispiece courtesy of the Bibliothe`que publique et
universitaire, Neuchaˆtel, Switzerland.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Vattel, Emer de, 1714–1767. [Droit des gens. English]
The law of nations, or, Principles of the law of nature, applied to the conduct and affairs
of nations and sovereigns, with three early essays on the origin and nature
of natural law and on luxury/Emer de Vattel;
edited and with an introduction by Be´la Kapossy and Richard Whatmore;
translated by Thomas Nugent.
p.
cm.—(Natural law and enlightenment classics)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn 978-0-86597-450-0 (hc: alk. paper)
isbn 978-0-86597-451-7 (pbk.: alk. paper)
1. International law.
2. War (International law)
3. Natural law.
I. Kapossy, Be´la, 1965–
II. Whatmore, Richard.
III. Title.
IV. Title: Law of nations.
V. Title: Principles of the law of nature, applied to the conduct and affairs of nations and
sovereigns, with three early essays on the origin and nature of natural law and on luxury.
kz2414.a3d7613
2008
341—dc22
2007048362
liberty fund, inc.
8335 Allison Pointe Trail, Suite 300
Indianapolis, Indiana 46250-1684


contents
chapter iv
Of the Right to Security, and the Effects of the
Sovereignty and Independence of Nations.
49. Right to security,
154
50. It produces the right of resistance,
154
51. and that of obtaining reparation,
155
52. and the right of punishing,
155
53. Right of all nations against a mischievous people,
155
54. No nation has a right to interfere in the government
of another state,
155
55. One sovereign cannot make himself judge of the
conduct of another,
155
56. How far lawful to interfere in a quarrel between a
sovereign and his subjects,
156
57. Right of opposing the interference of foreign
powers in the affairs of government,
157
58. The same right with respect to religion,
157
59. No nation can be constrained in religious concerns,
158
60. Ofﬁces of humanity in these matters:—
missionaries,
158
61. Circumspection to be used,
159
62. What a sovereign may do in favour of those who
profess his religion in another state,
159
chapter v
Of the Observance of Justice between Nations.
63. Necessity of the observance of justice in
human society,
160
64. Obligation of all nations to cultivate and
observe justice,
160
65. Right of refusing to submit to injustice,
160
66. This right is a perfect one,
161
67. It produces—the right of self-defence,
161
68. the right of doing ourselves justice,
161


original contents
37
Sect. 69. The right of punishing injustice,
page 161
70. Right of all nations against one that openly
despises justice,
161
chapter vi
Of the Concern a Nation may have in
the Actions of her Citizens.
71. The sovereign is bound to avenge the wrongs of the
state, and to protect the citizens,
161
72. He must not suffer his subjects to offend other
nations or their citizens,
162
73. The acts of individuals not imputable to the nation,
<xxxiv>
162
74. unless she approve or ratify them,
162
75. Conduct to be pursued by the offended party,
162
76. Duty of the aggressor’s sovereign,
163
77. If he refuses justice, he becomes a party in the fault
and offence,
163
78. Another case in which the nation is guilty of the
crimes of the citizens,
164
chapter vii
Effects of the Domain, between Nations.
79. General effects of the domain,
164
80. What is comprehended in the domain of a nation,
165
81. The property of the citizens is the national property
with respect to foreign states,
165
82. A consequence of that principle,
165
83. Connection of the domain of the nation with the
sovereignty,
165
84. Jurisdiction,
166
85. Effects of the jurisdiction in foreign countries,
166
86. Desert and uncultivated places,
167
87. Duty of the nation in that respect,
168
88. Right of possessing things that have no owner,
168
89. Rights granted to another nation,
168
90. Not allowable to expel a nation from the country
she inhabits,
168
91. nor to extend by violence the bounds of empire,
169


38
original contents
Sect. 92. The limits of territories ought to be
carefully ascertained,
page 169
93. Violation of territory,
169
94. Prohibition to enter the territory,
170
95. A country possessed by several nations at the
same time,
170
96. A country possessed by a private person,
170
97. Independent families in a country,
170
98. Possession of certain places only, or of certain
rights, in a vacant country,
171
chapter viii
Rules respecting Foreigners.
99. General idea of the conduct a state ought to
observe towards foreigners,
171
100. Entering the territory,
172
101. Foreigners are subject to the laws,
172
102. and punishable according to the laws,
172
103. Who is the judge of their disputes,
173
104. Protection due to foreigners,
173
105. Their duties,
173
106. To what burthens they are subject,
174
107. Foreigners continue members of their own nation,
174
108. The state has no right over the person of a
foreigner, <xxxv>
174
109. nor over his property,
174
110. Who are the heirs of a foreigner,
175
111. Will of a foreigner,
175
112. Escheatage,
176
113. The right of traite foraine,
177
114. Immovable property possessed by an alien,
177
115. Marriages of aliens,
177
chapter ix
Of the Rights retained by all Nations after the
Introduction of Domain and Property.
116. What are the rights of which men cannot
be deprived,
178
117. Right still remaining from the primitive state
of communion,
178

original contents
39
Sect. 118. Right retained by each nation over the
property of others,
page 178
119. Right of necessity,
178
120. Right of procuring provisions by force,
179
121. Right of making use of things belonging
to others,
179
122. Right of carrying off women,
179
123. Right of passage,
180
124. and of procuring necessaries,
180
125. Right of dwelling in a foreign country,
180
126. Things, of which the use is inexhaustible,
181
127. Right of innocent use,
181
128. Nature of that right in general,
182
129. and in cases not doubtful,
182
130. Exercise of that right between nations,
182
chapter xii
349
Unequal treaties arethoseinwhichthealliesdonotreciprocallyprom-
ise to each other the same things, or things equivalent; and an alliance
is unequal when it makes a difference in the dignity of the contracting
parties. It is true, that most commonly an unequal treaty will be at the
same time an unequal alliance; as great potentates are seldom accus-
tomed to give or to promise more than is given or promised to them,
unless such concessions be fully compensated in the article of honour
and glory; and, on the other hand, a weak state does not submit to bur-
thensome conditions without being obliged also to acknowledge the su-
periority of her ally.
Those unequal treaties that are at the same time unequal alliances,are
divided into two classes,—the ﬁrst consisting of those where the in-
equality prevails on the side of the more considerable power,—the second
comprehending treaties where the inequality is on the side of the inferior
power.
Treaties of the former class, without attributing to the more powerful
of the contracting parties any right over the weaker, simply allow him a
superiority of honours and respect. We have treated of this in Book I.
§5. Frequently a great monarch, wishing to engage a weaker state in his
interest, offers her <201> advantageous conditions,—promises her gra-
tuitous succours, or greater than he stipulates for himself:butatthesame
time he claims a superiority of dignity, and requires respect from hisally.
It is this last particular which renders the alliance unequal: and to this
circumstance we must attentively advert; for with alliancesof thisnature
we are not to confound those in which the parties treat on a footing of
equality, though the more powerful of the allies, for particular reasons,
gives more than he receives, promises his assistance gratis, without re-
quiring gratuitous assistance in his turn, or promises more considerable
succours, or even the assistance of all his forces:—here the alliance is
equal, but the treaty is unequal, unless indeed we may be allowed to say,
that, as the party who makes the greater concessions has a greaterinterest
in concluding the treaty, this consideration restores the equality. Thus,
at a time when France found herself embarrassed in a momentous war
with the house of Austria, and the cardinal de Richelieu wished to hum-
ble that formidable power, he, like an able minister, concluded a treaty
§175. Unequal
treaties and
unequal
alliances.


350
book ii: nations in relation to other states
with Gustavus Adolphus,31 in which all the advantage appeared to be on
the side of Sweden. From a bare consideration of the stipulations of
that treaty, it would have been pronounced an unequal one; but the ad-
vantages which France derived from it, amply compensated for that in-
equality. The alliance of France with the Swiss, if we regard the stipu-
lations alone, is an unequal treaty; but the valour of the Swiss troops has
long since counterbalanced that inequality; and the difference in the in-
terests and wants of the parties serves still further to preserve the equi-
librium. France, often involved in bloody wars, has received essential
services from the Swiss: the Helvetic body, void of ambition, and un-
tainted with the spirit of conquest, may live in peace with the whole
world; they have nothing to fear, since they have feelingly convincedthe
ambitious, that the love of liberty gives the nation sufﬁcient strength to
defend her frontiers. This alliance may at certain times have appeared
unequal:—our forefathers* paid little attention to ceremony:—but in
reality, and especially since the absolute independence of the Swiss is
acknowledged by the empire itself, the alliance is certainly equal, al-
though the Helvetic body do not hesitate to yield to the king of France
all that pre-eminence which the established usage of modern Europe
attributes to crowned heads, and especially to great monarchs.
Treaties in which the inequality prevails on the side of the inferior
power,—that is to say, those which impose on the weaker party more
extensive obligations or greater burthens, or bind him down to oppres-
sive and disagreeable conditions,—these unequal treaties, I say, are al-
ways at the same time unequal alliances; for the weaker party never
submits to burthensome conditions, without being obliged also to ac-
knowledge the superiority of his ally. These conditions are commonly
imposed by the conqueror, or dictated by necessity, which obligesaweak
state to seek <202> the protection or assistance of another more pow-
erful; and by this very step, the weaker state acknowledges her own in-
feriority. Besides, this forced inequality in a treaty of alliance is a dis-
paragement to her, and lowers her dignity, at the same time that it exalts
that of her more powerful ally. Sometimes also, the weaker state not
* The author was a native of Switzerland. [[Note added in 1797 edition.]]
31. Gustavus Adolphus, king of Sweden, r. 1611–32.

chapter xii
351
being in a condition to promise the same succours as the more powerful
one, it becomes necessary that she should compensate for her inability
in this point, by engagements which degrade her below her ally, and
often even subject her, in various respects, to his will. Of this kind are
all those treaties in which the weaker party alone engages not to make
war without the consent of her more powerful ally,—to have the same
friends and the same enemies with him,—to support and respect his
dignity,—to have no fortresses in certain places,—not to trade or raise
soldiers in certain free countries,—to deliver up her vessels of war, and
not to build others, as was the case of the Carthaginians when treating
with their Roman conquerors,—to keep up only a certain number of
troops, &c.
These unequal alliances are subdivided into two kinds; they either im-
pair the sovereignty, or they do not. We have slightly touched on this, in
Book I. Ch. I. and XVI.
The sovereignty subsists entire and unimpaired when noneof itscon-
stituent rights are transferred to the superior ally, or rendered, as to the
exertion of them, dependent on his will. But the sovereignty is impaired
when any of its rights are ceded to an ally, or even if the use of them be
merely rendered dependent on the will of that ally. For example, the
treaty does not impair the sovereignty, if the weaker state only promises
not to attack a certain nation without the consent of her ally. By such
an engagement she neither divests herself of her right, nor subjects the
exertion of it to another’s will; she only consentstoarestrictioninfavour
of her ally: and thus she incurs no greater diminution of liberty than is
incurred by promises of every kind. Such reservations are every day stip-
ulatedinalliancesthatareperfectlyequal.Butif eitherof thecontracting
parties engages not to make war against any one whatsoever withoutthe
consent or permission of an ally who on his side does not make the same
promise, the former contracts an unequal alliance with diminution of
sovereignty; for he deprives himself of one of the most important
branches of the sovereign power, or renders the exertion of it dependent
on another’s will. The Carthaginians having, in the treaty that termi-
nated the second Punic war,32 promised not to make war on any state
32. Second Punic War, 218–202 b.c.


352
book ii: nations in relation to other states
without the consent of the Roman people, were thenceforward, and for
that reason, considered as dependent on the Romans.
When a nation is forced to submit to the will of a superior power,
she may lawfully renounce her former treaties, if the party with whom
she is obliged to enter into an alliance requires it of her. As she then loses
a part of her sovereignty, her ancient treaties fall to the ground together
with the power that had concluded them. This is a necessity that cannot
be imputed <203> to her as a crime: and since she would have a right
to place herself in a state of absolute subjection, and to renounce her
own sovereign, if she found such measures necessary for her preserva-
tion,—by a much stronger reason, she has a right, under the same ne-
cessity, to abandon her allies. But a generous people will exhaust every
resource before they will submit to terms so severe and so humiliating.
In general, as every nation ought to be jealous of her glory, careful of
maintaining her dignity, and preserving her independence, nothing
short of the last extremity, or motives the most weighty and substantial,
ought ever to induce a people to contract an unequal alliance. This ob-
servation is particularly meant to apply to treaties where the inequality
prevails on the side of the weaker ally, and still more particularlytothose
unequal alliancesthatdegrade thesovereignty.Menof courageandspirit
will accept such treaties from no other hands but those of imperious
necessity.
Notwithstanding every argument which selﬁsh policy may suggest to
the contrary, we must either pronounce sovereigns to be absolutely
emancipated from all subjection to the law of nature, or agree that it is
not lawful for them, without just reasons, to compel weaker states to
sacriﬁce their dignity, much less their liberty, by unequal alliances. Na-
tions owe to each other the same assistance, the same respect, the same
friendship, as individuals living in a state of nature. Far from seeking to
humble a weaker neighbour, and to despoil her of her most valuable
advantages, they will respect and maintain her dignity and her liberty,
if they are inspired by virtue more than by pride,—if they are actuated
by principles of honour more than by the meaner views of sordid in-
terest,—nay, if they have but sufﬁcient discernment to distinguish their
real interests. Nothing more ﬁrmly secures the power of agreatmonarch
§176. How an
alliance with
diminution of
sovereignty
may annul
preceding
treaties.
§177. We
ought to avoid
as much as
possible
making un-
equal alliances.
§178. Mutual
duties of
nations with
respect to un-
equal alliances.


chapter xii
353
than his attention and respect to all other sovereigns. The more cautious
he is to avoid offending his weaker brethren,—the greater esteem he
testiﬁes for them,—the more will they revere him in turn: they feel an
affection for a power whose superiority over them is displayed only by
the conferring of favours: they cling to such a monarch as their prop
and support; and he becomes the arbiter of nations. Had his demeanour
been stamped with arrogance, he would have been the object of their
jealousy and fear, and might perhaps have one day sunk under their
united efforts.
Butastheweakerpartyought,inhisnecessity,toacceptwithgratitude
the assistance of the more powerful, and not to refuse him such honours
and respect as are ﬂattering to the person who receives them, without
degrading him by whom they are rendered,—so, on the other hand,
nothing is more conformable to the law of nature, than a generousgrant
of assistance from the more powerful state, unaccompanied by any de-
mand of a return, or, at least, of an equivalent. And in this instancealso,
there exists an inseparable connection between interest and duty. <204>
Sound policy holds out a caution to a powerful nation not to suffer the
lesser states in her neighbourhood to be oppressed. If she abandonthem
to the ambition of a conqueror, he will soon become formidable to her-
self. Accordingly, sovereigns, who are in general sufﬁciently attentive to
their own interests, seldom fail to reduce this maxim to practice. Hence
those alliances, sometimes against the house of Austria, sometimes
against its rival, according as the power of the one or the other prepon-
derates. Hence that balance of power, the object of perpetual negotia-
tions and wars.
When a weak and poor nation has occasion for assistance of another
kind,—when she is afﬂicted by famine,—we have seen (§5), that those
nations who have provisions ought to supply her at a fair price. It were
noble and generous to furnish them at an under price, or to make her a
present of them, if she be incapable of paying their value. To oblige her
to purchase them by an unequal alliance, and especially at the expense
of her liberty,—to treat her as Joseph formerly treated the Egyptians,—
would be a cruelty almost as dreadful, as suffering her to perish with
famine.
§179. In alli-
ances where
the inequality
is on the side
of the more
powerful party.


354
book ii: nations in relation to other states
But there are cases where the inequality of treaties and alliances, dic-
tated by some particular reasons, is not contrary to equity, nor, conse-
quently, to the law of nature. Such, in general, are all those cases in which
the duties that a nation owes to herself, or those which she owes to other
nations, prescribe to her a departure from the line of equality. If, for in-
stance, a weak state attempts, without necessity, to erect a fortress, which
she is incapable of defending, in a place where it might become very dan-
gerous to her neighbour if ever it should fall into the hands of a powerful
enemy, that neighbour may oppose the construction of the fortress; and
if he does not ﬁnd it convenient to pay the lesser state a compensation
for complying with his desire, he may force her compliance, by threat-
ening to block up the roads and avenues of communication, to prohibit
all intercourse between the two nations, to build fortresses, or to keep an
army on the frontier, to consider that little state in a suspicious light, &c.
He thus indeed imposes an unequal condition; but his conduct is au-
thorised by the care of his own safety. In the same manner he may oppose
the forming of a highway, that would open to an enemy an entrance into
his state. War might furnish us with a multitude of other examples. But
rights of this nature are frequently abused; and it requires no less mod-
eration than prudence to avoid turning them into oppression.
Sometimes those duties to which other nations have a claim, rec-
ommend and authorise inequality in a contrary sense, withoutaffording
any ground of imputation against a sovereign, of having neglected the
duty which he owes to himself or to his people. Thus gratitude,—the
desire of shewing his deep sense of a favour received,—may induce a
generous sovereign to enter into <205> an alliance with joy, and to give
in the treaty more than he receives.
It is also consistent with justice to impose the conditions of an un-
equal treaty, or even an unequal alliance, by way of penalty, in order to
punish an unjust aggressor, and render him incapable of easily injuring
us for the time to come. Such was the treaty to which the elder Scipio
Africanus33 forced the Carthaginians to submit, after he had defeated
33. Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus Major, 236–183 b.c., defeated Hannibal at
Zama and thereby ended the Second Punic War (218–202 b.c.).
§180. How
inequality of
treaties and
alliances may
be conform-
able to the law
of nature.
§181. Inequal-
ity imposed by
way of pun-
ishment.
chapter xii
355
Hannibal.34 The conqueror often dictates such terms: and his conduct
in this instance is no violation of the laws of justice or equity, provided
he do not transgress the bounds of moderation, after he has been
crowned with success in a just and necessary war.
The different treaties of protection,—those by which a state renders
itself tributary or feudatory to another,—form so many different kinds
of unequal alliances. But we shall not repeat here what we have said
respecting them in Book I. Chap. I. and XVI.
By another general division of treaties or alliances, they are distin-
guished into personal and real: the former are those that relate to the
persons of the contracting parties, and are conﬁned and in a manner
attached to them. Real alliances relate only to the matters in negotiation
between the contracting parties, and are wholly independent of their
persons.
A personal alliance expires with him who contracted it.
A real alliance attaches to the body of the state, and subsists as long
as the state, unless the period of its duration has been limited.
It is of considerable importance not to confound these two sorts of
alliances. Accordingly, sovereigns are at present accustomed to express
themselves in their treaties in such a manner as to leave no uncertainty
in this respect: and this is doubtless thebestand safestmethod.Indefault
of this precaution, the very subject of the treaty, or the expressions in
which it is couched, may furnish a clue to discover whether it be real or
personal.—On this head we shall lay down some general rules.
In the ﬁrst place, we are not to conclude that a treaty is a personal one
from the bare circumstance of its naming the contracting sovereigns:for
the name of the reigning sovereign is often inserted with the sole view
of shewing with whom the treaty has been concluded, withoutmeaning
thereby to intimate that it has been made with himself personally. This
34. Hannibal Barca, 247–183 b.c., Carthaginian general who proved a threat to
Roman miitary supremacy.
§182. Other
kinds of which
we have spoken
elsewhere.
§183. Personal
and real treaties.
§184. Naming
the contracting
parties in the
treaty does not
render it
personal.


356
book ii: nations in relation to other states
is an observation of the civilians Pedius35 and Ulpian,*36 repeated by all
writers who have treated of these subjects.
Every alliance made by a republic is in its own nature real, foritrelates
only to the body of the state. When a free people, a popular state, or an
aristocratical republic, concludes a treaty, it is the state herself that con-
tracts; and her engagements <206> do not depend on the lives of those
who were only the instruments in forming them: the members of the
people, or of the governing body, change and succeed each other; but
the state still continues the same.
Since, therefore, such a treaty directly relates to the body of the state,
it subsists, though the form of the republic should happen to be
changed,—even though it should be transformed into a monarchy. For
the state and the nation are still the same, notwithstanding everychange
that may take place in the form of the government; and the treaty con-
cluded with the nation remains in force as long as the nation exists. But
it is manifest that all treaties relating to the form of government are
exceptions to this rule. Thus two popular states, that have treated ex-
pressly, or that evidently appear to have treated, with the view of main-
taining themselves in concert in their state of liberty and popular gov-
ernment, cease to be allies from the very moment that one of them has
submitted to be governed by a single person.
Every public treaty, concluded by a king or by any other monarch, is
a treaty of the state; it is obligatory on the whole state, on the entire
nation which the king represents, and whose power and rights he ex-
ercises. It seems then at ﬁrst view, that every public treaty ought to be
presumed real, as concerning the state itself. There can be no doubt with
respect to the obligation to observe the treaty: the only question that
arises, is respecting its duration. Now there is often room to doubt
whether the contracting parties have intended to extend their reciprocal
* Digest. [[of Justinian]] lib. ii. tit. xiv. de Pactis, leg. vii. §8.
35. Quintus Pedius, nephew of Julius Caesar, served as a Roman general in Gaul
and became consul in 43 b.c.
36. Domitius Ulpianus (Ulpian), d. a.d. 228. Roman jurist and majorcontributor
to the Corpus Juris Civilis.
§185. An alli-
ance made by
a republic is
real.
§186. Treaties
concluded by
kings or other
monarchs.


chapter xii
357
engagements beyond the term of their own lives, and to bind their suc-
cessors. Conjunctures change; a burthen that is at present light, may in
other circumstances become insupportable or at least oppressive: the
manner of thinking among sovereigns is no less variable; and there are
certain things of which it is proper that each prince should be at liberty
to dispose according to his own system. There are others that are freely
granted to one king, and would not be allowed to his successor. It there-
fore becomes necessary to consider the terms of the treaty, or the matter
which forms the subject of it, in order to discover the intentions of the
contracting powers.
Perpetual treaties, and those made for a determinate period, are real
ones, since their duration cannot depend on the lives of the contracting
parties.
In the same manner, when a king declares in the treaty that it is made
“for himself and his successors,” it is manifest that this is a real treaty. It
attaches to the state, and is intended to last as long as the kingdom itself.
When a treaty expressly declares that it is made for the good of the
kingdom, it thus furnishes an evident proof that the contractingpowers
did not mean that its duration should depend on that of their own lives,
but on that of the kingdom itself. Such treaty is therefore a real one.
<207>
Independently even of this express declaration, when a treaty is made
for the purpose of procuring to the state a certain advantage which is in
its own nature permanent and unfailing, there is no reason to suppose
that the prince by whom the treaty hasbeenconcluded,intendedtolimit
it to the duration of his own life. Such a treaty ought therefore to be
considered as a real one, unless there exist very powerful evidence to
prove that the party with whom it was made, granted the advantage in
question only out of regard to the prince then reigning, and asa personal
favour: in which case the treaty terminates with the life of the prince, as
the motive for the concession expires with him. But such a reservation
is not to be presumed on slight grounds: for it would seem that if the
contracting parties had had it in contemplation, they should have ex-
pressed it in the treaty.
§187. Per-
petual treaties,
and those for a
certain time.
§188. Treaties
made for the
king and his
successors.
§189. Treaties
made for the
good of the
kingdom.


358
book ii: nations in relation to other states
In case of doubt, where there exists no circumstance by which we can
clearly prove either the personality or the reality of a treaty, it ought to
be presumed a real treaty if it chieﬂy consists of favourable articles,—
if of odious ones, a personal treaty. By favourable articles we meanthose
which tend to the mutual advantage of the contracting powers, and
which equally favour both parties; by odious articles, we understand
those which onerate one of the parties only, or which impose a much
heavier burthen upon the one than upon the other. We shall treat this
subject more at large in the chapter on the “Interpretation of Treaties.”
Nothing is more conformable toreason and equitythanthisrule.When-
ever absolute certainty is unattainable in the affairs of men, we must
have recourse to presumption. Now, if the contracting powers have not
explained themselves, it is natural, when the question relates to things
favourable, and equally advantageous to the two allies, to presume that
it was their intention to make a real treaty, as being the more advanta-
geous to their respective kingdoms: and if we are mistaken in this pre-
sumption, we do no injury to either party. But if there be any thing
odious in the engagements,—if one of the contracting states ﬁnds itself
overburthened by them,—how can it be presumed that the prince who
entered into such engagements, intended to lay that burthen upon his
kingdom in perpetuity? Every sovereign is presumed to desire the safety
and advantageof thestatewithwhichheisintrusted:whereforeitcannot
be supposed that he has consented to load it forever with a burthensome
obligation. If necessity rendered such a measure unavoidable, it was in-
cumbent on his ally to have the matter explicitly ascertained at the time;
and it is probable that he would not have neglected this precaution,well
knowing that mankind in general, and sovereigns in particular, seldom
submit to heavy and disagreeable burthens, unless bound to do so by
formal obligations. If it happens then that the presumption is a mistake,
and makes him lose something of his right, it is a consequence of his
own negligence. To this we may add, that if either the one or the other
must sacriﬁce a part of his right, it will be a <208> less grievousviolation
of the laws of equity that the latter should foregoanexpectedadvantage,
than that the former should suffer a positive loss and detriment. This is
the famous distinction de lucro captando, and de damno vitando.
§190. How
presumption
ought to be
founded in
doubtful cases.


chapter xii
359
We do not hesitate to include equal treaties of commerce in the num-
ber of those that are favourable, since they are in general advantageous,
and perfectly conformable to the law of nature. As to alliances made on
account of war, Grotius says with reason, that “defensive alliances are
more of a favourable nature,—offensive alliances have something in
them that approaches nearer to what is burthensome or odious.”*
We could not dispense with the preceding brief summary of those
discussions, lest we should in this part of our treatise leave a disgusting
chasm. They are however but seldom resorted to in modern practice, as
sovereigns at present generally take the prudent precaution of explicitly
ascertaining the duration of their treaties. They treat for themselvesand
their successors,—for themselves and their kingdoms,—for perpetu-
ity,—for a certain number of years, &c.—or they treat only for the time
of their own reign,—for an affair peculiar tothemselves,—fortheirfam-
ilies, &c.
Since public treaties, even those of a personal nature, concluded by
a king or by any other sovereign who is invested with sufﬁcient power,
are treaties of state, and obligatory on the whole nation (§186), real trea-
ties, which were intended to subsist independently of the person who
has concluded them, are undoubtedly binding on his successors; andthe
obligation which such treaties impose on the state, passes successivelyto
all her rulers as soon as they assume the public authority. The case is the
same with respect to the rights acquired by those treaties: they are ac-
quired for the state, and successively pass to her conductors.
It is at present a pretty general custom for the successor to conﬁrm or
renew even real alliances concluded by his predecessors: and prudence
requires that this precaution should not be neglected, since men pay
greater respect to an obligation which they have themselves contracted,
than to one which devolves on them from another quarter, or to which
they have only tacitly subjected themselves. The reason is, that, in the
former case, they consider their word to be engaged, and, in the latter,
their conscience alone.
* De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap. xvi. §16.
§191. The
obligations
and rights
resulting from
a real treaty
pass to the
successors.

360
book ii: nations in relation to other states
The treaties that have no relation to the performance of reiterated
acts, but merely relate to transient and single acts which are concluded
at once,—those treaties (unless indeed it be more proper to call them by
another name)*—those conventions, those compacts, which areaccom-
plished once for all, and not by successive acts,—are no sooner executed
than they are <209> completed and perfected. If they are valid, they
have in their own nature a perpetual and irrevocable effect: nor have we
them in view when we inquire whether a treaty be real or personal. Puf-
fendorf†givesusthefollowingrulestodirectusinthisinquiry—“1.That
the successors are bound to observe the treaties of peace concluded by
their predecessors. 2. That a successor should observe all the lawful con-
ventions by which his predecessor has transferred any right to a third
party.” This is evidently wandering from the point in question: it is only
saying that what is done with validity by a prince, cannot be annulled
by his successors.—And who doubts it? A treaty of peace is in its own
nature made with a view to its perpetual duration: and as soon as it is
once duly concluded and ratiﬁed, the affair is at an end; the treaty must
be accomplished on both sides, and observed according to its tenour. If
it is executed upon the spot, there ends the business at once. But if the
treaty contains engagements for the performance of successive and re-
iterated acts, it will still be necessary to examine, according to the rules
we have laid down, whether it be in this respect real or personal,—
whether the contracting parties intended to bind their successors to the
performance of those acts, or only promised them for the time of their
own reign. In the same manner, as soon as a right is transferred by a
lawful convention, it no longer belongs to the state that has ceded it; the
affair is concluded and terminated. But if the successor discovers any
ﬂaw in the deed of transfer, and proves it, he is not to be accused of
maintaining that the convention is not obligatory on him, and refusing
to fulﬁl it;—he only shews that such convention has not taken place: for
a defective and invalid deed is a nullity, and to be considered as having
never existed.
* See chap. xii. §153, of this book.
† Law of Nature and Nations, book viii. chap. ix. §8.
§192. Treaties
accomplished
once for-all,
and perfected.


chapter xii
361
The third rule given by Puffendorf is no less useless with respect to
this question. It is, “that if, after the other allyhasalreadyexecutedsome-
thing to which he was bound by virtue of the treaty, the king happens
to die before he has accomplished in his turn what he had engaged to
perform, his successor is indispensably obliged to perform it. For, what
the other ally has executed under the condition of receiving an equiv-
alent, having turned to the advantage of the state, or at least havingbeen
done with that view, it is clear, that if he does not receive the return for
which he had stipulated, he then acquires the same right as a man who
has paid what he did not owe; and therefore the successor is obliged to
allow him a complete indemniﬁcation for what he has done or given, or
to make good, on his own part, what his predecessor had engaged to
perform.” All this, I say, is foreign to our question. If the alliance is real,
it still subsists notwithstanding the death of one of the contracting par-
ties; if it is personal, it expires with them, or either of them (§183). But
when a personal alliance comes to be dissolved in this manner, it is quite
a different ques-<210>tion to ascertain what one of the allied states is
bound to perform, in case the other has already executed something in
pursuance of the treaty; and this question is to be determined on very
different principles. It is necessary to distinguish the nature of what has
been done pursuant to the treaty. If it has been any of those determinate
and substantial acts which it is usual with contracting parties mutually
to promise to each other in exchange or by way of equivalent, there can
be no doubt that he who has received, ought to give what he has prom-
ised in return, if he would adhere to the agreement, and is obliged to
adhere to it: if he is not bound, and is unwilling to adhere to it, he ought
to restore what he has received, to replace things in their former state,
or to indemnify the ally from whom he has received the advantage in
question. To act otherwise, would be keeping possession of another’s
property. In this case, the ally is in the situation, not of a man who has
paid what he did not owe, but of one who has paid before-hand for a
thing that has not been delivered to him. But if the personal treaty re-
lated to any of those uncertain and contingent acts which are to be per-
formed as occasions offer,—of those promises which are not obligatory
if an opportunity of fulﬁlling them does not occur,—it is only on oc-
§193. Treaties
already accom-
plished on the
one part.


362
book ii: nations in relation to other states
casion likewise that the performance of similar acts is due in return: and
when the term of the alliance is expired, neither of the parties remains
bound by any obligation. In a defensive alliance, for instance, two kings
have reciprocally promised each other a gratuitous assistance during the
term of their lives: one of them is attacked: he is succoured by his ally,
and dies before he has an opportunity to succour him in his turn: the
alliance is at an end, and no obligation thence devolves on the successor
of the deceased, except indeed that he certainly owes a debt of gratitude
to the sovereign who has given a salutary assistance to his state. And we
must not pronounce such an alliance an injurious one to the ally who
has given assistance without receiving any. His treaty was one of those
speculating contracts in which the advantages or disadvantages wholly
depend on chance: he might have gained by it, though it has been his
fate to lose.
We might here propose another question. The personal alliance ex-
piring at the death of one of the allies, if the survivor, under an idea that
it is to subsist with the successor, fulﬁls the treaty on his part in favour
of the latter, defends his country, saves some of his towns, or furnishes
provisions for his army,—what ought the sovereign to do, who is thus
succoured? He ought, doubtless, either to suffer the alliance to subsist,
as the ally of his predecessor has conceived that it was to subsist (and
this will be a tacit renewal and extension of the treaty)—or to pay for
the real service he has received, according to a just estimate of its im-
portance, if he does not chuse to continue that alliance. It would be in
such a case as this that we might say with Puffendorf, that he who has
rendered such a service <211> has acquired the right of a man who has
paid what he did not owe.
The duration of a personal alliance being restricted to the persons of
the contracting sovereigns,—if, from any cause whatsoever, oneof them
ceases to reign, the alliance expires: for they have contracted in quality
of sovereigns; and he who ceases to reign, no longer exists as a sovereign,
though he still lives as a man.
Kingsdonotalwaystreatsolelyanddirectlyfortheirkingdoms;some-
times by virtue of the power they have in their hands, they make treaties
relative to their own persons, or their families; and this theymaylawfully
§194. The
personal alli-
ance expires if
one of the
contracting
powers ceases
to reign.
§195. Treaties
in their own
nature
personal.


chapter xii
363
do, as the welfare of the state is interested in the safety and advantage
of the sovereign, properly understood. These treaties are personal in
their own nature, and expire of course on the death of the king or the
extinction of his family. Such is an alliance made for the defence of a
king and his family.
It is asked, whether such an alliance subsists with the king and the
royal family, when by some revolution they are deprived of the crown?
We have remarked above (§194), that a personal alliance expires with the
reign of him who contracted it: but that is to be understood of an al-
liance formed with the state, and restricted, in its duration, to the reign
of the contracting king. But the alliance of which we are now to treat
is of another nature. Although obligatory on the state, sincesheisbound
by all the public acts of her sovereign, it is made directly in favour of
the king and his family; it would therefore be absurd that it should be
dissolved at the moment when they stand in need of it, and by the very
event which it was intended to guard against. Besides, the king does not
forfeit the character of royalty merely by the loss of his kingdom. If he
is unjustly despoiled of it by an usurper, or by rebels, he still preserves
his rights, among which are to be reckoned his alliances.
But who shall judge whether a king has been dethroned lawfully or
by violence? An independent nation acknowledges no judge. If thebody
of the nation declare that the king has forfeited his right by the abuse
he has made of it, and depose him, they may justly do it when their
grievances are well founded; and no other power has a right to censure
their conduct. The personal ally of this king ought not thereforetoassist
him against the nation who have made use of their right in deposing
him: if he attempts it, he injures that nation. England declared war
against Louis XIV. in the year 1688, for supporting the interests of
James II.37 who had been formally deposed by the nation. The same
country declared war against him a second time at the beginning of the
present century, because that prince acknowledged the son of the de-
37. James II of England, r. 1685–88.
§196. Alliance
concluded for
the defence of
the king and
the royal
family.


364
book ii: nations in relation to other states
posed monarch, under the title of James III.38 In doubtful cases, and
whenthebody of thenationhasnotpronounced,orhasnotpronounced
freely, a sovereign ought naturally to support and defend an ally; and it
is then that the<212> voluntarylawof nationssubsistsbetweendifferent
states. The party who have expelled the king, maintain that they have
right on their side: the unfortunateprinceandhisalliesﬂatterthemselves
with having the same advantage; and as they have no common judge
upon earth, there remains no other mode of deciding the contest, than
an appeal to arms: they therefore engage in a formal war.
Finally, when the foreign prince has faithfully fulﬁlled his engage-
ments towards an unfortunate monarch, when he has done, in his de-
fence, or to procure his restoration, every thing which, by the terms of
the alliance, he was bound to do,—if his efforts have proved ineffectual,
it cannot be expected by the dethroned prince that he shall support an
endless war in his favour,—that he shall forever continue at enmity with
the nation or the sovereign who has deprived him of the throne. He
must at length think of peace, abandon his unfortunate ally, and con-
sider him as having himself abandoned his right throughnecessity.Thus
Louis XIV. was obliged to abandon James II. and to acknowledge king
William,39 though he had at ﬁrst treated him as an usurper.
The same question presents itself in real alliances, and, in general, in
all alliances made with a state, and not in particular with a king, for the
defence of his person. An ally ought doubtless to be defended against
every invasion, against every foreign violence, and even against his re-
bellious subjects; in the same manner a republic ought to be defended
against the enterprises of one who attempts to destroy the public liberty.
But the other party in the alliance ought to recollect that he is the ally
and not the judge of the state or the nation. If the nation has deposed
her king in form, if the people of a republic have expelled their mag-
istrates, and set themselves at liberty, or, either expressly or tacitly, ac-
38. Prince James Francis Edward Stuart (“the Young Pretender”), 1688–1766, son
of James II and Jacobite claimant to the British crown as James III of England and
James VIII of Scotland.
39. William III, r. 1689–1702.
§197. Obliga-
tion of a real
alliance, when
the allied king
is deposed.


chapter xii
365
knowledged the authority of an usurper,—toopposethesedomesticreg-
ulations, or to dispute their justice or validity, would be interfering in
the government of the nation, and doing her an injury (see §§54, &c.
of this book). The ally remains the ally of the state, notwithstandingthe
change that has happened in it. However, if this change renders the al-
liance useless, dangerous, or disagreeable to him, he is at liberty to re-
nounce it: for he may upon good grounds assert that he would not have
entered into an alliance with that nation, had she been under her present
form of government.
To this case we may also apply what we have said above respecting a
personal ally. However just thecauseof thatkingmaybe,whoisexpelled
from the throne either by his subjects or by a foreign usurper, his allies
are not obliged to support an eternalwar in hisfavour.Afterhavingmade
ineffectual efforts to reinstate him, they must at length restore to their
people the blessings of peace; they must come to an accommodation
with the usurper, and for that purpose treat with him as with a lawful
sovereign. Louis the Fourteenth, ﬁnding himself exhausted by a bloody
and unsuccessful war, made an offer at Gertruyden-<213>berg, to aban-
don his grandson, whom he had placed on the throne of Spain: and
afterwards, when the aspect of affairs was changed, Charles of Austria,
the rival of Philip, saw himself, in his turn, abandoned by his allies.40
They grew weary of exhausting their states in order to put him in pos-
session of a crown to which they thought him justly entitled, but which
they no longer saw any probability of being able to procure for him.
40. King Charles II of Spain died without a direct heir in 1700 but was succeeded
by Philip of Anjou (as Philip V, r. 1700–1746), thereby raising the possibility of a
union of the French and Spanish crowns. The ensuingWarof theSpanishSuccession
(1700–1714) was fought to prevent French dominion on mainland Europe, with the
Austrians, English, and Dutch favoring Archduke Charles of Austria (Holy Roman
Emperor 1711–40) as the alternative to succeed Charles II.

366
book ii: nations in relation to other states
chapter xiii
Of the Dissolution and Renewal of Treaties.
An alliance is dissolved at the expiration of the term for which it had
been concluded. This term is sometimes ﬁxed, as when an alliance is
made for a certain number of years; sometimes it is uncertain, as in per-
sonal alliances, whose duration depends on the lives of the contracting
powers. The term is likewise uncertain, when two or more sovereigns
form an alliance with a view to some particular object, as, for instance,
that of expelling a horde of barbarous invaders from a neighbouring
country,—of reinstating a sovereign on his throne, &c. The durationof
such an alliance depends on the completion of the enterprise for which
it was formed. Thus, in the last-mentioned instance, when the sovereign
is restored, and so ﬁrmly seated on his throne, as to be able to retain the
undisturbed possession of it, the alliance, which was formed with a sole
view to his restoration, is now at an end. But, on the other hand, if the
enterprise prove unsuccessful,—the moment his allies are convinced of
the impossibility of carrying it into effect, the alliance is likewise at an
end: for it is time to renounce an undertaking when it is acknowledged
to be impracticable.
A treaty, entered into for a limited time, may be renewed by the com-
mon consent of the allies,—which consent may be either expressly or
tacitly made known. When the treaty is expressly renewed, it is the same
as if a new one were concluded, in all respects similar to the former.
The tacit renewal of a treaty is not to be presumed upon slight
grounds: for engagements of so high importance are well entitled to the
formality of an express consent. The presumption, therefore, of a tacit
renewal must be founded on acts of such a natureasnottoadmitadoubt
of their having been performed in pursuance of the treaty. But, even in
thiscase, still anotherdifﬁcultyarises:for,accordingtothecircumstances
and nature of the acts in question, they may prove nothing more than
a simple continuationor extensionof thetreaty,—whichisverydifferent
from a renewal, especially as to the term of duration. For instance, En-
gland has entered into a subsidiary <214> treaty with a German prince,
§198. Expira-
tion of alli-
ances made for
a limited time.
§199. Renewal
of treaties.


chapter xiii
367
who is to keep on foot, during ten years, a stated number of troops at
the disposal of that country, on condition of receiving from heracertain
yearly sum. The ten years being expired, the king of England causes the
sum stipulated for one year to be paid: the ally receives it: thus the treaty
is indeed tacitly continued for one year; but it cannot be said to be re-
newed; for the transaction of that year does not impose an obligation
of doing the same thing for ten years successively. But supposing a sov-
ereign has, in consequence of an agreement with a neighbouring state,
paid her a million of money for permission to keep a garrison in one of
her strongholds during ten years,—if, at the expiration of that term, the
sovereign, instead of withdrawing his garrison, makes his ally a tender
of another million, and the latter accepts it, the treaty is, in this case,
tacitly renewed.
When the term for which the treaty was made is expired, each of the
allies is perfectly free, and may consent or refuse to renew it, as he thinks
proper. It must, however, be confessed, that, if one of the parties, who
has almost singly reaped all the advantages of the treaty, should,without
just and substantial reasons, refuse to renew it now that he thinks he will
no longer stand in need of it, and foresees the time approaching when
his ally may derive advantage from it in turn,—such conduct would be
dishonourable, inconsistent with that generosity which should charac-
terise sovereigns, and widely distant from those sentiments of gratitude
and friendship that are due to an old and faithful ally. It is but too com-
mon to see great potentates, when arrived at the summit of power, ne-
glect those who have assisted them in attaining it.
Treaties contain promises that are perfect and reciprocal. If one of
the allies fails in his engagements, the other may compel him to fulﬁl
them:—a perfect promise confers a right to do so. But if the latter has
no other expedient than that of arms to force his ally to the performance
of his promises, he will sometimes ﬁnd it more eligible to cancel the
promises on his own side also, and to dissolve the treaty. He has un-
doubtedly a right to do this, since his promises were made only on con-
dition that the ally should on his part execute every thing which he had
engaged to perform. The party, therefore, who is offended or injured in
those particulars which constitute the basis of the treaty, is at liberty to
§200. How
a treaty is
dissolved,
when violated
by one of the
contracting
parties.


368
book ii: nations in relation to other states
chuse the alternative of either compelling a faithless ally to fulﬁl his en-
gagements, or of declaring the treaty dissolved by his violation of it. On
such an occasion, prudence and wise policy will point out the line of
conduct to be pursued.
But when there exist between allies two or more treaties, different
from and independent of each other, the violation of one of those trea-
ties does not directly disengage the injured party from the obligations
he has contracted in the others: for the promises contained in these, do
not depend on those included in the violated treaty. But the offended
ally may, on the breach of <215> one treaty by the other party, threaten
him with a renunciation, on his own part, of all the other treaties by
which they areunited,—and mayputhisthreatsinexecutionif theother
disregards them. For if any one wrests or with-holds from me my right,
I may, in the state of nature, in order to oblige him to do me justice, to
punish him, or to indemnify myself, deprive him also of some of his
rights, or seize and detain them till Ihave obtainedcompletesatisfaction.
And if recourse is had to arms in order to obtain satisfaction for the
infringement of that treaty, the offended party begins by stripping his
enemy of all the rights which had accrued to him from the different
treaties subsisting between them: and we shall see, in treating of war,
that he may do this with justice.
Some writers* would extend what we have just said to the different
articles of a treaty which have no connection with the article that has
been violated,—saying we ought to consider those several articles as so
many distinct treaties concluded at the same time. They maintainthere-
fore, that if either of the allies violates one article of the treaty, the other
has not immediately a right to cancel the entire treaty, but that he may
either refuse, in his turn, what he had promised with a view to the vi-
olated article, or compel his ally to fulﬁlhispromisesif therestillremains
a possibility of fulﬁlling them,—if not, to repair the damage; and that
for this purpose he may threaten to renounce the entire treaty,—a men-
ace which he may lawfully put in execution, if it be disregarded by the
other. Such undoubtedly is the conduct which prudence, moderation,
* See Wolﬁus, Jus Gent. §432.
§201. The
violation of
one treaty does
not cancel
another.
§202. The
violation of
one article in
a treaty may
cancel the
whole.


chapter xiii
369
the love of peace, and charity would commonly prescribe to nations.
Who will deny this, and madly assert that sovereigns are allowed to have
immediate recourse to arms, or even to break every treaty of allianceand
friendship, fortheleastsubjectof complaint?Butthequestionhereturns
on the simple right, and not on the measures which are to be pursued
in order to obtain justice; and the principle upon which those writers
ground their decision, appears to me utterly indefensible. We cannot
consider the several articles of the same treaty as so many distinct and
independent treaties: for though we do not see any immediate connec-
tion between some of those articles, they are all connected by this com-
mon relation, viz. that the contracting powers have agreed to some of
them in consideration of the others, and by way of compensation. I
would perhaps never have consented to this article, if my ally had not
granted me another, which in its own nature has no relation to it. Every
thing, therefore, which is comprehended in the same treaty, is of the
same force and nature as a reciprocal promise, unless where a formal
exception is made to the contrary. Grotius very properly observes that
“every article of a treaty carries with it a condition, by the non-
performance of which, the treaty is wholly cancelled.”* He adds that a
clause is some-<216>times inserted to the following effect, viz. “that the
violation of any one of the articles shall not cancel the whole treaty,” in
order that one of the parties may not have, in every slight offence, a
pretext for receding from his engagements. This precaution is extremely
prudent, and very conformable to the care which nations ought to take
of preserving peace, and rendering their alliances durable.
In the same manner as a personal treaty expires at the death of the
king who has contracted it, a real treaty is dissolved, if one of the allied
nations is destroyed,—that is to say, not only if the men who compose
it happen all to perish, but also if, from any cause whatsoever, it loses its
national quality, or that of a political and independent society. Thus
when a state is destroyed and the people are dispersed, or when they are
subdued by a conqueror, all their alliances and treaties fall to the ground
with the public power that had contracted them. But it is here to be
* Grotius de Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap. xv. §15.
§203. The
treaty is void
by the destruc-
tion of one of
the contracting
powers.


370
book ii: nations in relation to other states
observed, that treaties or alliances which impose a mutual obligation to
perform certain acts, and whose existence consequently depends on that
of the contracting powers, arenotto beconfoundedwiththosecontracts
by which a perfect right is once for all acquired, independent of any
mutual performance of subsequent acts. If, for instance, a nation has
forever ceded to a neighbouring prince the right of ﬁshing in a certain
river, or that of keeping a garrison in a particular fortress, that prince
does not lose his rights, even though the nation, from whom he has re-
ceived them, happens to be subdued, or in any other manner subjected
to a foreign dominion. His rights do not depend on the preservation of
that nation: she had alienated them; and the conqueror by whom she
has been subjugated can only take what belonged to her. In the same
manner, the debts of a nation, or those for whichthe sovereignhasmort-
gaged any of his towns or provinces, are not cancelled by conquest. The
king of Prussia,41 on acquiring Silesia by conquest and by the treaty of
Breslau,42 took upon himself the debts for which that province stood
mortgaged to some English merchants. In fact, his conquest extended
no further than the acquisition of those rights which the house of Aus-
tria had possessed over the country; and he could only take possession
of Silesia, such as he found it at the time of the conquest, with all its
rights and all its burthens. For a conqueror to refuse to pay the debts of
a country he has subdued, would be robbing the creditors, with whom
he is not at war.
Since a nation or a state, of whatever kind, cannot make any treaty
contrary to those by which she is actually bound (§165), she cannot put
herself under the protection of another state, without reserving all her
alliances, and all her existing treaties. For the conventionbywhichastate
places herself under the protection of another sovereign, is a treaty
(§175); if she does it of her own accord, she ought to do it in such a
manner, that the new treaty may involve no in-<217>fringement of her
pre-existing ones. We have seen (§176) what rights a nation derives, in a
case of necessity, from the duty of self-preservation.
41. Frederick II (r. 1740–86), king of Prussia, known as Frederick the Great.
42. The Treaty of Breslau, 1742.
§204. Alliances
of a state that
has afterwards
put herself
under the
protection of
another.


chapter xiii
371
The alliances of a nation are therefore not dissolved when she puts
herself under the protection of another state, unless they be incompat-
ible with the conditions of that protection. The ties by which she was
bound to her former allies still subsist, and those allies stillremainbound
by their engagements to her, as long as she has not putitout of herpower
to fulﬁl her engagements to them.
When necessity obliges a people to put themselves under the protec-
tion of a foreign power, and to promise him the assistance of theirwhole
force against all opponents whatsoever, without excepting theirallies,—
their former alliances do indeed subsist, so far as they are not incom-
patible with the new treaty of protection. But if the case shouldhappen,
that a former ally enters into a war with the protector, the protectedstate
will be obliged to declare for the latter, to whom she is bound by closer
ties, and by a treaty which, in case of collision, is paramount to all the
others. Thus the Nepesinians having been obliged to submit totheEtru-
rians, thought themselves afterwards bound to adhere to their treaty of
submission or capitulation, preferably to the alliance which had sub-
sisted between them and the Romans: postquam deditionis, quam socie-
tatis, ﬁdes sanctior erat, says Livy.*
Finally, as treaties are made by the mutual agreement of the parties,
they may also be dissolved by mutual consent, at the free will of the
contracting powers. And even though a third party should ﬁnd himself
interested in the preservation of the treaty, and should suffer by its dis-
solution,—yet, if he had no share in making such treaty, and no direct
promise had been made to him, those whohavereciprocallymadeprom-
ises to each other, which eventually prove advantageous to that third
party, may also reciprocally release each other from them, without con-
sultinghim,orwithouthishavingarighttoopposethem.Twomonarchs
have bound themselves by a mutual promise to unite their forces for the
defence of a neighbouring city: that city derives advantage from their
assistance; but she has no right to it; and as soon as the two monarchs
think proper mutually to dispense with their engagements, she will be
* Lib.vi.cap.x.[[“Whenthesanctityof theirsurrenderprovedtobemorebinding
on them than that of their alliance.” Ab urbe condita VI.10.]]
§205. Treaties
dissolved by
mutual consent.

372
book ii: nations in relation to other states
deprived of their aid, but can have no reason to complain on the oc-
casion, since no promise had been made to her. <218>
chapter xiv
Of other public Conventions,—of those that are
made by subordinate Powers,—particularly of the
Agreement called in Latin Sponsio,—and of
Conventions of Sovereigns with private Persons.
The public compacts, called conventions, articles of agreement, &c.
when they are made between sovereigns, differ from treaties onlyintheir
object (§153). What we have said of the validity of treaties, of their ex-
ecution, of their dissolution, and of the obligations and rights that ﬂow
from them, is all applicable to the various conventions which sovereigns
may conclude with each other. Treaties, conventions, and agreements,
are all public engagements, in regard to which there is but one and the
same right, and the same rules. We do not here wish to disgust the reader
by unnecessary repetitions: and it were equally unnecessary to enter into
an enumeration of the various kinds of these conventions, which are
always of the same nature, and differ only in the matter which consti-
tutes their object.
But there are public conventions made by subordinate powers, in vir-
tue either of an express mandate from the sovereign, or of the authority
with which they are invested by the terms of their commission, and ac-
cording as the nature of the affairs with which they are intrusted, may
admit or require the exercise of that authority.
The appellation of inferior or subordinate powers is given to public
persons who exercise some portion of the sovereignty in the name and
under the authority of the sovereign: such are magistratesestablishedfor
the administration of justice, generals of armies, and ministers of state.
When, by an express order from their sovereign on the particular oc-
casion, and with sufﬁcient powers derived from him for the purpose,
those persons form a convention, such convention is made in the name
§206. Conven-
tions made by
sovereigns.
§207. Those
made by
subordinate
powers.


chapter xiv
373
of the sovereign himself, who contracts by the mediation and ministry
of his delegate or proxy: this is the case we have mentioned in §156.
But public persons, by virtue of their ofﬁce, or of the commission
given to them, have also themselves the power of making conventions
on public affairs, exercising on those occasions the right and authority
of the sovereign by whom they are commissioned. There are two modes
in which they acquire that power:—it is given to them in express terms
by the sovereign; or it is naturally derived from their commission it-
self,—the nature of the affairs with which these persons are intrusted,
requiring that they should have a power to make such conventions, es-
pecially in cases where they cannot await the or-<219>ders of their sov-
ereign. Thus the governor of a town, and the general who besieges it,
have a power to fettle the terms of capitulation: and whateveragreement
they thus form within the terms of their commission, is obligatory on
the state or sovereign who has invested them with the power by which
they conclude it. As conventions of this nature take place principally in
war, we shall treat of them more at large in Book III.
If a public person, an embassador, or a general of an army, exceeding
the bounds of his commission, concludes a treaty or a convention with-
out orders from the sovereign, or without being authorised to do it by
virtue of his ofﬁce, the treaty is null, as being made without sufﬁcient
powers (§157): it cannot become valid without the express or tacit rati-
ﬁcation of the sovereign. The express ratiﬁcation is a written deed by
which the sovereign approves the treaty, and engages to observe it. The
tacit ratiﬁcation is implied by certain steps which the sovereign is justly
presumed to take only in pursuance of the treaty, and which he could
not be supposed to take without considering it as concluded and agreed
upon. Thus, on a treaty of peace being signed by public ministers who
have even exceeded the orders of their sovereigns, if one of the sover-
eigns causes troops to pass on the footing of friends through the terri-
tories of his reconciled enemy, he tacitly ratiﬁes the treaty of peace. But
if, by a reservatory clause of the treaty, the ratiﬁcation of the sovereign
be required,—as such reservation is usually understood to imply an ex-
press ratiﬁcation, it is absolutely requisitethatthetreatybethusexpressly
ratiﬁed before it can acquire its full force.
§208. Treaties
concluded by a
public person,
without orders
from the
sovereign, or
without sufﬁ-
cient powers.


374
book ii: nations in relation to other states
By the Latin term, sponsio, we express an agreement relating to affairs
of state, made by a public person, who exceeds the bounds of his com-
mission, and acts without the orders or command of the sovereign. The
person who treats for the state in this manner without being commis-
sioned for the purpose, promises of course to use his endeavours for
prevailing on the state or sovereign to ratify the articles he has agreed to:
otherwise his engagement would be nugatory and illusive. The foun-
dation of this agreement can be no other, on either side, than the hope
of such ratiﬁcation.
The Roman history furnishes us with various instances of suchagree-
ments:—the one that ﬁrst arrests our attention is that which was con-
cluded at the Furcae Caudinae,—the most famous instance on record,
and one that had been discussed by the most celebrated writers. The
consuls Titus Veturius Calvinus and Spurius Postumius, with the Ro-
man army, being inclosed in the deﬁles of the Furcae Caudinae without
hope of escaping, concluded a shameful agreement with the Sam-
nites,43—informing them, however, that they could notmakearealpub-
lic treaty (foedus) without orders from the Roman people, without the
feciales, and the ceremonies consecratedbycustom.TheSamnitegeneral
contented himself with exacting a promise from the consuls and <220>
principal ofﬁcers of the army, and obliging them to deliver him six hun-
dred hostages; after which, having made the Roman troops lay down
their arms, and obliged them to pass under the yoke, he dismissed them.
The senate, however, refused to accede to the treaty,—deliveredupthose
who had concluded it to the Samnites, who refused to receive them,—
and then thought themselves free from all obligation, and screenedfrom
all reproach.* Authors have entertained very different sentiments of this
conduct. Some assert, that if Rome did not chuse to ratify the treaty,
she ought to have replaced things in the same situation they were in
before the agreement, by sending back the whole army to their en-
campment at the Furcae Caudinae; and this the Samnites also insisted
* Livy, lib. ix.
43. Battle at the Caudine Forks (321 b.c.) as described in the ninth book of Livy’s
History of Rome (the Second Samnite War 321–304 b.c.).
§209. The
agreement
called sponsio.


chapter xiv
375
upon. I confess that I am not entirely satisﬁed with the reasonings I have
found on this question, even in authors whose eminent superiority I am
in other respects fully inclined to acknowledge. Let us therefore endeav-
our, with the aid of their observations, to set the affair in a new light.
It presents two questions,—ﬁrst, what is the person bound todo,who
has made an agreement (sponsor), if the state disavows it?—Secondly,
what is the state bound to do?—But, previous to the discussion of these
questions, it is necessary to observe, with Grotius,* that the state is not
bound by an agreement of that nature. This is manifest, even from the
deﬁnition of the agreement called sponsio. The state has not givenorders
to conclude it: neither has she in any manner whatever conferred the
necessary powers for the purpose: she has neither expressly given them
by her injunctions or by a plenipotentiary commission, nor tacitly, by a
natural or necessary consequence of the authority intrusted to him who
makes the agreement (sponsori). The general of an army has, indeed, by
virtue of his commission,apowertoenter,ascircumstancesmayrequire,
into a private convention,—a compact relative to himself, to his troops,
or to the occurrences of war: but he has no power to conclude a treaty
of peace. He may bind himself, and the troops under his command, on
all the occasions where his functions require that he should have the
power of treating; but he cannot bind the state beyond the extent of his
commission.
Let us now see to what the person promising (sponsor)isbound,when
the state disavows the agreement. We ought not here to deduce our ar-
guments from the rules which obtain between private individuals under
the law of nature: for the nature of the things in question, and the sit-
uation of the contracting parties, necessarily make a difference between
the two cases. It is certain that, between individuals, he who purely and
simply promises what depends on the will of another, without being
authorised to make such promise, is obliged, if the other disavows the
transaction, to accomplish himself what he has promised,—<221>to
give an equivalent,—to restore things to their former state,—or, ﬁnally,
to make full compensation to the person with whom he has treated,
* De Jure Belli & Pacis, lib. ii. cap. xv. §16.
§210. The
state is not
bound by such
an agreement.
§211. To what
the promiser is
bound when it
is disavowed.


376
book ii: nations in relation to other states
according to the various circumstances of thecase. Hispromise(sponsio)
can be understood in no other light. But this is not the case with respect
to a public person, who, without orders and without authority, engages
for the performance of his sovereign. The question in such case relates
to things that inﬁnitely surpass his power and all his faculties,—things
which he can neither execute himself, nor cause to be executed, and for
which he cannot offer either an equivalent or a compensationinanywise
adequate: he is not even at liberty to give the enemy what he has prom-
ised, without authority: ﬁnally, it is equally out of his power to restore
things entirely to their former state. The party who treats with him can-
not expect any thing of this nature. If the promiser has deceived him
by saying he was sufﬁciently authorised, he has a right to punish him.
But if, like the Roman consuls at the Furcae Caudinae, the promiser has
acted with sincerity, informing him that he had not a power to bind the
state by a treaty,—nothing else can be presumed, but that theotherparty
was willing to run the risk of making a treaty that must become void,
if not ratiﬁed,—hoping that a regard for him who had promised, and
for the hostages, would induce the sovereign to ratify what hadbeenthus
concluded. If the event deceives his hopes, he can only blame his own
imprudence. An eager desire of obtaining peace on advantageous con-
ditions, and the temptation of some present advantages, may have been
his only inducements to make so hazardous an agreement. This was ju-
diciously observed by the consul Postumius himself, after his return to
Rome. In his speech to the senate, as given to us by Livy,44 “Your gen-
erals,” said he, “and those of the enemy, were equally guilty of impru-
dence,—we, in incautiously involving ourselves in a dangerous situa-
tion,—they, in suffering a victory to escape them, of which the nature
of the ground gave them a certainty,—still distrusting their own advan-
tages, and hasting, at any price, to disarm men who were everformidable
while they had arms in their hands. Why did they not keep us shut up
in our camp? Why did they not send to Rome, in order to treatforpeace,
on sure grounds, with the senate and the people?”
It is manifest that the Samnites contented themselves with the hope
44. Livy, History of Rome, ii, 16.


chapter xiv
377
that the engagement whichtheconsulsandprincipalofﬁcershadentered
into, and the desire of saving six hundred knights, leftashostages,would
induce the Romans to ratify the agreement,—considering, that, at all
events, they should still have those six hundred hostages, with the arms
and baggage of the army, and the vain, or rather, as it is proved by its
consequences, the fatal glory, of having made them pass under the yoke.
Under what obligation then were the consuls, and all the others who
had joined with them in the promise (sponsores)? They themselves
judged that they ought to be delivered up to <222> the Samnites. This
was not a natural consequence of the agreement (sponsionis); and from
the observations above made, it does not appear that a general in such
circumstances, having promised things which the promisee well knew
to be out of his power, is obliged, on his promise being disavowed, to
surrender his own person by way of compensation. But ashehasapower
expressly to enter into such an engagement, which lies fairly within the
bounds of his commission, the custom of those times had doubtless
rendered such engagement a tacit clause of the agreement called sponsio,
since the Romans delivered up all the sponsores, all those who had prom-
ised:—this was a maxim of their fecial law.*
If the sponsor has not expressly engaged to deliver himself up, and if
established custom does not lay him under an obligation to do so, it
would seem that he is bound to nothing further by his promise than
honestly to endeavour by every lawful means to induce the sovereign to
ratify what he has promised: and there cannot exist a doubt in the case,
provided the treaty be at all equitable, advantageous to the state, or sup-
portable in consideration of the misfortune from which it has preserved
her. But to set out with the intention of making a treaty the instrument
to ward off a deadly blow from the state, and soon after to advise the
sovereign to refuse his ratiﬁcation, not because the treaty is insupport-
* I have said in my preface, that the fecial law of the Romans was their law of war.
The college of the feciales were consulted on the causes that might authorise the
nation to engage in a war, and on the questions to which it gave rise. They had also
the care of the ceremonies on the declaration of war, and on concluding treaties of
peace. The feciales were likewise consulted, and their agency employed, in all public
treaties.

378
book ii: nations in relation to other states
able, but because an advantage may be taken of its having been con-
cluded without authority,—such a proceeding would undoubtedly be a
fraudulent and shameful abuse of the faith of treaties. But what must
the general do, who, in order to save his army, has been forced to con-
clude a treaty that is detrimental or dishonourable to the state? Must he
advise the sovereign to ratify it?—He will content himself with laying
open the motives of his conduct, and the necessity that obliged him to
treat; he will shew, as Postumius did, that he alone is bound, and that
he consents to be disowned and delivered up for the public safety. If the
enemy are deceived, it is through their own folly. Was the general bound
to inform them, that, in all probability, his promises would not be rat-
iﬁed? It would be too much to require this of him. In such a case, it is
sufﬁcient that he does not impose on the enemy by pretending to more
extensive powers than he really possesses, but contents himself withem-
bracing the overtures which they make to him, without on his side hold-
ing forth any delusive hopes to decoy them into a treaty. It is theenemy’s
business to take all possible precautions for their own security: if they
neglect them, why should not the general avail himself of their impru-
dence, as of an advantage presented to him by the hand of fortune? “It
is she,” said Postumius, “who has <223> saved our army after havingput
it in danger. The enemy’s head was turned in his prosperity; and his
advantages have been no more to him than a pleasant dream.”
If the Samnites had only required of the Roman generals and army
such engagements as the nature of their situation,andtheircommission,
empowered them to enter into,—if they had obliged them to surrender
themselves prisoners of war,—or if, from their inability to hold them all
prisoners, they had dismissed them upon their promise not to bear arms
against them for some years, in case Rome should refuse to ratify the
peace,—the agreement would have been valid, as being made with suf-
ﬁcient powers; and the whole army would have been bound to observe
it; for it is absolutely necessary that the troops, or their ofﬁcers, should
have a power of entering into a contract on those occasions, and upon
that footing. This is the case of capitulations, of which we shall speak
in treating of war.
If the promiser has made an equitable and honourable convention,


chapter xiv
379
on an affair of such a nature, that, in case the convention be disallowed,
he still has it in his own power to indemnify the party with whom he
has treated,—he is presumed tohavepersonallypledgedhimself forsuch
indemniﬁcation; and he is bound to make it, in order to discharge his
promise, as did Fabius Maximus45 in the instance mentioned by Gro-
tius.* But there are occasions when the sovereign may forbid him to act
in that manner, or to give any thing to the enemies of the state.
We have shewn, that a state cannot be bound by an agreement made
without her orders, and without her having granted any power for that
purpose. But is she absolutely free from all obligation? That is the point
which now remains for us to examine. If matters as yet continue in their
original situation, the state or the sovereign may simply disavow the
treaty, which is of course done away by such disavowal, and becomes as
perfect a nullity as if it had never existed. But the sovereign ought to
make known his intentions as soon as the treaty comes to hisknowledge;
not indeed that his silence alone can give validity to a convention which
the contracting parties have agreed not to consider as valid without his
approbation; but it would be a breach of good-faith in him to suffer a
sufﬁcient time to elapse for the other party to execute on his side an
agreement which he himself is determined not to ratify.
If any thing has already been done in consequence of the agree-
ment,—if the party, who has treated with the sponsor, has on his side
fulﬁlled his engagements either in the whole or in part,—is the other
party, on disavowing the treaty, bound to indemnify him, or restore
things to their former situation,—or is he allowed to reap the fruits of
the treaty, at the same time that he refuses <224> to ratify it? We should
here distinguish the nature of the things that have been executed, and
that of the advantages which have thence accrued to the state. He who,
* Lib. ii. chap. xv. §16 [[Grotius, Law of War and Peace]]. Fabius Maximushaving
concluded an agreement with the enemy which the senate disapproved, sold a piece
of land for which he received two hundred thousand sesterces, in order to make good
his promise. It related to the ransom of the prisoners. Aurel. Victor [[Sextus Aurelius
Victor]], de Viris Illustr. Plutarch’s life of Fabius Maximus.
45. Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus, ca. 275–203 b.c., served as consul, dic-
tator, and censor at Rome and fought in the Second Punic War.
§212. To what
the sovereign
is bound.


380
book ii: nations in relation to other states
having treated with a public person not furnishedwithsufﬁcientpowers,
executes the agreement on his side without waiting for its ratiﬁcation, is
guilty of imprudence, and commits an egregious error, into which he
has not been led by the state with which he supposes he has contracted.
If he has given up any part of his property, the other party is not jus-
tiﬁable in taking advantage of his folly, and retaining possession of what
he has so given. Thus, when a state, thinking she has concluded a peace
with the enemy’s general, has in consequence delivered up one of her
strong places, or given a sum of money, the sovereign of that general is
undoubtedly bound to restore what he has received, if he does not chuse
to ratify the agreement. To act otherwise would be enriching himself
with another’s property, and retaining that property without having any
title to it.
But if the agreement has given nothing to the state which she did not
before possess,—if, as in that of the Furcae Caudinae, the advantage
simply consists in her escape from an impending danger, her preserva-
tion from a threatened loss,—suchadvantageisaboonof fortune,which
she may enjoy without scruple. Who would refuse to be saved by the
folly of his enemy? And who would think himself obliged to indemnify
that enemy for the advantage he had suffered to escape him, when no
fraud had been used to induce him to forego that advantage? The Sam-
nites pretended, that if the Romans would not ratify the treaty made by
their consuls, they ought to send back the army to the Furcae Caudinae,
and restore every thing to its former state. Two tribunes of the people,
who had been in the number of the sponsores, and wished to avoid being
delivered up, had the assurance to maintain the same doctrine;andsome
authors have declared themselves of their opinion. What! the Samnites
take advantage of conjunctures in order to give law to the Romans, and
to wrest from them a shameful treaty,—they are so imprudent as to treat
with the consuls who expressly declare themselves unauthorised to con-
tract for the state,—they suffer the Roman army to escape, after having
covered them with infamy,—and shall not the Romans take advantage
of the folly of an enemy so void of generosity? Must they either ratify
a shameful treaty, or restore to that enemy all those advantages which
the situation of the ground had given him, but which he had lost merely


chapter x
How a Nation is to use her Right of Domain, in
order to discharge her Duties towards other Nations,
with respect to the Innocent Use of Things.
131. General duty of the proprietor,
183
132. Innocent passage,
183
133. Securities may be required,
184
134. Passage of merchandise,
184
135. Residence in the country,
184
136. How we are to act towards foreigners who desire a
perpetual residence,
185
137. Right accruing from a general permission,
185
138. A right granted as a favour,
186
139. The nation ought to be courteous,
186
chapter xi
Of Usucaption and Prescription between Nations.
140. Deﬁnition of usucaption and prescription,
187
141. Usucaption and prescription derived from the law
of nature, <xxxvi>
187
142. What foundation is required for ordinary
prescription,
189
143. Immemorial prescription,
189


40
original contents
Sect. 144. Claimant alleging reasons for his silence,
page 190
145. Proprietor sufﬁciently shewing that he
does not mean to abandon his right,
190
146. Prescription founded on the actions of
the proprietor,
190
147. Usucaption and prescription take place
between nations,
190
148. More difﬁcult, between nations, to found them on
a presumptive desertion,
190
149. Other principles that enforce prescription,
191
150. Effects of the voluntary law of nations on
this subject,
191
151. Law of treaties, or custom, in this matter,
192
chapter xii
Of Treaties of Alliance, and other public Treaties.
152. Nature of treaties,
192
153. Compacts, agreements, or conventions,
192
154. By whom treaties are made,
192
155. Whether a state under protection may
make treaties,
193
156. Treaties concluded by proxies or plenipotentiaries,
193
157. Validity of treaties,
194
158. Injury does not render them void,
194
159. Duty of nations in that respect,
194
160. Nullity of treaties which are pernicious to
the state,
194
161. Nullity of treaties made for an unjust or
dishonest purpose,
195
162. Whether an alliance may be contracted with those
who do not profess the true religion,
195
163. Obligation to observe treaties,
195
164. The violation of a treaty is an act of injustice,
196
165. Treaties cannot be made, contrary to those
already existing,
196
166. How treaties may be concluded with several
nations with the same view,
197
167. The more ancient ally entitled to a preference,
197
168. We owe no assistance in an unjust war,
197
169. General division of treaties:—those that relate to
things already due by the law of nature,
197


original contents
41
Sect. 170. Collision of those treaties with the duties
we owe to ourselves,
page 198
171. Treaties in which we barely promise to do
no injury,
198
172. Treaties concerning things that are not naturally
due:—equal treaties,
198
173. Obligation to preserve equality in treaties,
199
174. Difference between equal treaties and
equal alliances,
200
175. Unequal treaties, and unequal alliances,
200
176. An alliance with diminution of sovereignty may
annul preceding treaties,
202
177. We ought, as much as possible, to avoid making
unequal alliances, <xxxvii>
203
178. Mutual duties of nations with respect to
unequal alliances,
203
179. in alliances where the inequality is on the side of
the more powerful party,
203
180. How inequality of treaties and alliances may be
conformable to the law of nature,
204
181. Inequality imposed by way of punishment,
205
182. Other kinds, of which we have spoken
elsewhere,
205
183. Personal and real treaties,
205
184. Naming the contracting parties in the treaty does
not render it personal,
205
185. An alliance made by a republic is real,
205
186. Treaties concluded by kings or other monarchs,
206
187. Perpetual treaties, and those for a certain time,
206
188. Treaties made for the king and his successors,
206
189. Treaties made for the good of the kingdom,
206
190. How presumption ought to be founded in
doubtful cases,
207
191. The obligations and rights resulting from a real
treaty pass to the successors,
208
192. Treaties accomplished once for all, and perfected,
208
193. Treaties already accomplished on the one part,
209
194. The personal alliance expires if one of the parties
ceases to reign,
211
195. Treaties in their own nature personal,
211
196. Alliance concluded for the defence of the king and
royal family,
211

42
original contents
Sect. 197. Obligation of a real alliance, when the
allied king is deposed,
page 212
chapter xiii
Of the Dissolution and Renewal of Treaties.
198. Expiration of alliances made for a limited time,
213
199. Renewal of treaties,
213
200. How a treaty is dissolved, when violated by
one of the contracting parties,
214
201. The violation of one treaty does not
cancel another,
214
202. The violation of one article in a treaty may cancel
the whole,
215
203. The treaty is void by the destruction of one of the
contracting powers,
216
204. Alliances of a state that has afterwards put herself
under the protection of another,
216
205. Treaties dissolved by mutual consent,
217
chapter xiv
Of other public Conventions,—of those that are
made by Subordinate Powers,—particularly
of the Agreement called in Latin Sponsio,—
and of Conventions between the Sovereign
and Private Persons.
206. Conventions made by sovereigns, <xxxviii>
218
207. Those made by subordinate powers,
218
208. Treaties concluded by a public person,
without orders from the sovereign, or without
sufﬁcient powers,
219
209. The agreement called sponsio,
219
210. The state is not bound by such an agreement,
220
211. To what the promiser is bound when it
is disavowed,
220
212. To what the sovereign is bound,
223
213. Private contracts of the sovereign,
226
214. Contracts made by him with private persons,
in the name of the state,
226
215. They are binding on the nation, and on
his successors,
227


original contents
43
Sect. 216. Debts of the sovereign and the state,
page 227
217. Donations of the sovereign,
228
chapter xv
Of the Faith of Treaties.
218. What is sacred among nations,
229
219. Treaties sacred between nations,
229
220. The faith of treaties is sacred,
229
221. He who violates his treaties, violates the law
of nations,
229
222. Right of nations against him who disregards the
faith of treaties,
230
223. The law of nations violated by the popes,
230
224. This abuse authorised by princes,
231
225. Use of an oath in treaties.—It does not constitute
the obligation,
232
226. It does not change the nature of obligations,
232
227. It gives no pre-eminence to one treaty
above another,
232
228. It cannot give force to a treaty that is invalid,
233
229. Asseverations,
233
230. The faith of treaties does not depend on the
difference of religion,
233
231. Precaution to be taken in wording treaties,
233
232. Subterfuges in treaties,
234
233. An evidently false interpretation inconsistent
with the faith of treaties,
234
234. Faith tacitly pledged,
234
chapter xvi
Of Securities given for the Observance of Treaties.
235. Guaranty,
235
236. It gives the guarantee no right to interfere unasked
in the execution of a treaty,
236
237. Nature of the obligation it imposes,
236
238. The guaranty cannot impair the rights of a
third party,
236
239. Duration of the guaranty,
237
240. Treaties with surety,
237
241. Pawns, securities, and mortgages,
237


44
original contents
Sect. 242. A nation’s right over what she holds as a
pledge, <xxxix>
page 237
243. How she is obliged to restore it,
238
244. How she may appropriate it to herself,
238
245. Hostages,
238
246. What right we have over hostages,
239
247. Their liberty alone is pledged,
239
248. When they are to be sent back,
239
249. Whether they may be detained on any
other account,
239
250. They may be detained for their own actions,
240
251. Of the support of hostages,
240
252. A subject cannot refuse to be a hostage,
241
253. Rank of the hostages,
241
254. They ought not to make their escape,
241
255. Whether a hostage who dies is to be replaced,
242
256. Substitute for a hostage,
242
257. Hostage succeeding to the crown,
242
258. The liability of the hostage ends with the treaty,
242
259. The violation of the treaty is an injury done to
the hostages,
242
260. The fate of the hostage when he who has given
him fails in his engagements,
243
261. Right founded on custom,
243
chapter xvii
Of the Interpretation of Treaties.
262. Necessity of establishing rules of interpretation,
244
263. First general maxim—it is not allowable to
interpret what has no need of interpretation,
244
264. Second general maxim—if he who could and
ought to have explained himself, has not done it, it
is to his own detriment,
245
265. Third general maxim—neither of the contracting
parties has a right to interpret the treaty according
to his own fancy,
245
266. Fourth general maxim—what is sufﬁciently
declared, is to be taken for true,
245
267. We ought to attend rather to the words of
the person promising, than to those of the
party stipulating,
245


original contents
45
chapter xiv
381
through his own folly? Upon what principle can such a decision be
founded? Had Rome promised any thing to the Samnites? had she pre-
vailed upon them to let her army go, previous to the ratiﬁcation of the
agreement made by the consuls?—If she had received any thing in con-
sequence of that agreement, she would have been bound to restore it, as
we have already said, because she would have possessed it without a title,
on declaring the treaty null. But she had no share in the conduct of her
enemies: she did not contribute to the egregious blunder they had com-
mitted; <225> and she might as justly take advantage of it, as generals
in war do of the mistakes of an unskilful opponent. Suppose a con-
queror, after havingconcludedatreatywithministerswhohaveexpressly
reserved the ratiﬁcation to their master, should have the imprudence to
abandon all his conquests without waiting for such ratiﬁcation,—must
the other, with a foolish generosity, invite him back to take possession
of them again, in case the treaty be not ratiﬁed?
I confess, however, and freely acknowledge, that if the enemy who
suffer an entire army to escape on the faith of an agreement concluded
with the general, who is unprovided with sufﬁcient powers, and a simple
sponsor,—I confess, I say, that if the enemy have behaved generously,—
if they had notavailedthemselvesof theiradvantagestodictateshameful
or too severe conditions,—equity requires that the state should either
ratify the agreement, or conclude a new treaty on just and reasonable
conditions, abating even of her pretensions as far as the public welfare
will allow. For we ought never to abuse the generosity and noble con-
ﬁdence even of an enemy. Puffendorf* thinks that the treaty at the Fur-
cae Caudinae contained nothing that was too severe or insupportable.
That author seems to make no great account of the shameandignominy
with which it would have branded the whole republic. He did not see
the full extent of the Roman policy, which would never permit them,
in their greatest distresses, to accept a shameful treaty, or even to make
peace on the footing of a conquered nation:—a sublime policy,towhich
Rome was indebted for all her greatness.
Finally, let us observe, that, when the inferior power has, without or-
* Jus Nat. et Gent. lib. viii. cap. ix. §12.


382
book ii: nations in relation to other states
ders, and without authority, concluded an equitable and honourable
treaty, to rescue the state from an imminent danger,—if the sovereign
afterwards, on seeing himself thus delivered, should refuse to ratify the
treaty, not because he thinks it a disadvantageous one, but merely
through a wish to avoid performing those conditions which were an-
nexed as the price of his deliverance, hewouldcertainlyactinopposition
to all the rules of honour and equity. This would be a case in which we
might apply the maxim, summum jus, summa injuria.46
To the example we have drawn from the Roman history, let us add a
famous one taken from modern history. The Swiss, dissatisﬁed with
France, entered into an alliance with the emperor47 against Louis XII.
and made an irruption into Burgundy, in the year 1513. They laid siege
to Dijon. La Trimouille, who commanded in the place, fearing that he
should be unable to save it, treated with the Swiss, and, without waiting
for a commission from the king, concluded an agreement, by virtue of
which the king of France was to renounce his pretensions to the duchy
of Milan, and to pay the Swiss, by settled instalments, the sum of six
hundred thousand crowns; whereas the Swiss, on their side, <226>
promised nothing further than to return home to their own country,—
thus remaining at liberty to attack France again, if they thought proper.
They received hostages, and departed. The king was very much dissat-
isﬁed with the treaty, though it had saved Dijon, and rescued the king-
dom from an imminent and alarming danger; and he refused to ratify
it.* It is certain that La Trimouille had exceeded the powers he derived
from his commission, especially in promising that the king should re-
nounce the duchy of Milan. It is probable indeed that his only view was
to rid himself of an enemy whom it was less difﬁcult to over-reach in
negotiation than to subdue in battle. Louis was not obliged to ratify and
execute a treaty concluded without orders and without authority; and if
the Swiss were deceived, they could only blame their own imprudence.
* Guicciardini, book xii. chap. ii.—De Watteville’s Hist. of the Helvetic Con-
federacy, part ii. p. 185, &c. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
46. “The rigor of the law is the greatest injury.”
47. Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor, r. 1508–19; Louis II de la Tre´moille,
1460–1525.


chapter xiv
383
But as it manifestly appeared that La Trimouille did not behave towards
them with candor and honesty, since he had deceived them on the sub-
ject of the hostages, by giving, in that character, men of the meanest
rank, instead of four of the most distinguished citizens, as he had prom-
ised,*—the Swiss would have been justiﬁable in refusing to make peace
without obtaining satisfaction for that act of perﬁdy, either by the sur-
render of him who was the author of it, or in some other manner.
The promises, the conventions, all the private contracts of the sov-
ereign, are naturally subject to the same rules as those of privatepersons.
If any difﬁculties arise on the subject, it is equally conformable to the
rules of decorum, to that delicacy of sentiment which ought to be par-
ticularly conspicuous in a sovereign, and to the love of justice, to cause
them to be decided by the tribunals of the state. And such indeed is the
practice of all civilised states that are governed by settled laws.
The conventions and contracts which the sovereign, in his sovereign
character and in the name of the state, forms with private individuals
of a foreign nation, fall under the rules we have laid down with respect
to public treaties. In fact, when a sovereign enters into a contract with
one who is wholly independent of him and of the state, whether it be
with a private person, or with a nation or sovereign, this circumstance
does not produce any difference in the rights of the parties. If theprivate
person who has treated with a sovereign is his subject, the rights of each
party in this case also are the same: but there is a difference inthemanner
of deciding the controversies which may arise from the contract. That
private person, being a subject of the state, is obliged to submit his pre-
tensions to the established courts of justice. It is added by some writers
on this subject, that the sovereign may rescind those contracts, if they
prove inimical to the public welfare. Undoubtedly he may do so, but
not upon any principle derived from the peculiar nature of such con-
<227>tracts:—it must be either upon the same principle which invali-
dates even a public treaty when it is ruinous to the state and inconsistent
with the public safety,—or by virtue of the eminent domain, which gives
* See De Watteville’s Hist. of the Helvetic Confederacy, p. 190. [[Note added in
1773/1797 editions.]]
§213. Private
contracts of
the sovereign.
§214. Con-
tracts made
by him with
private persons
in the name of
the state.

384
book ii: nations in relation to other states
the sovereign a right to dispose of the property of the citizens with a
view to the common safety. We speak here of an absolute sovereign.
It is from the constitution of each state that we are to learn who are
the persons, and what is the power, entitled to contract in the name
of the state, to exercise the supreme authority, and to pronounce on
what the public welfare requires.
When a lawful power contracts in the name of the state, it lays an
obligation on the nation itself, and consequently on all the future rulers
of the society. When therefore a prince has the power to form a contract
in the name of the state, he lays an obligation on all his successors; and
these are not less bound than himself to fulﬁl his engagements.
The conductor of the nation may have dealings of his own, and pri-
vate debts; and his private property alone is liable for the discharge of
such debts. But loans contracted for the service of the state, debts in-
curred in the administration of public affairs, are contracts in all the
strictness of law, and obligatory on thestateand thewholenation,which
is indispensably bound to discharge those debts.* When once they have
been contracted by lawful authority, the right of the creditor is indefea-
sible. Whether the money borrowed has been turned to the advantage
of the state, or squandered in foolish expenses, is no concern of the
person who has lent it: he has intrusted the nation with his property;
and the nation is bound to restore it to him again: it is so much the worse
for her if she has committed the management of her affairs to improper
hands.
This maxim, however, has its bounds, founded even on the nature of
the thing. The sovereign has not, in general, a power to render the state
* In 1596, Philip II. [[Kingof Spain]]declaredhimself abankrupt,underpretence
that an unfair advantage had been taken of his necessities. His creditors loudly ex-
claimed against his conduct, and asserted that no conﬁdence could thenceforwardbe
placed either in his word or his treaties, since he interposed the royal authority to
supercede them. He couldno longer ﬁndanyonewhowaswillingtolendhimmoney;
and his affairs suffered so severely in consequence, that he was obliged to replace
things on their former footing, and to heal the wound which he had given to the
public faith. Grotius, Hist. of the Disturbances in the Netherlands, book v. [[Note
added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§215. They are
binding on the
nation, and on
his successors.
§216. Debts of
the sovereign
and the state.


chapter xiv
385
or body corporate liable for the debts he contracts, unless they be in-
curred with a view to the national advantage, and in order to enable him
to provide for all occurrences. If he is absolute, it belongs to him alone
to decide, in all doubtful cases, what the welfare and safety of the state
require. But if he should, without necessity, contract debts of immense
magnitude and capable of ruining the nation for ever, there could not
then exist any doubt in the case: the sovereign has evidently acted with-
out authority; and those who have lent him their money, have impru-
dently risked it. It cannot be pre-<228>sumed that a nation has ever
consented to submit to utter ruin through the caprice and foolish prod-
igality of her ruler.
As the national debts can only be paid by contributions and taxes,—
wherever the sovereign has not been intrusted bythenationwithapower
to levy taxes and contributions, or, in short, to raise supplies by his own
authority,—neither has he a power to render her liable for what he bor-
rows, or to involve the state in debt. Thus the king of England, who has
the right of making peace and war, has not that of contracting national
debts, without the concurrence of parliament, because he cannot, with-
out their concurrence, levy any money on his people.
The case is not the same with the donations of the sovereign as with
his debts. When a sovereign has borrowed without necessity, or for an
unwise purpose, the creditor has intrusted the state with his property;
and it is just that the state should restore it to him, if, at the time of the
transaction, he could entertain a reasonable presumption that it was to
the state he was lending it. But when the sovereign gives away any of
the property of the state,—a part of the national domain,—a consid-
erable ﬁef,—he has no right to make such grant except with a view to
the public welfare, as a reward for services rendered to the state, or for
some other reasonable cause, in which the nation is concerned: if he has
made the donation without reason and without a lawful cause, he has
made it without authority. His successor, or the state, may at any time
revoke such a grant: nor would the revocation be a wrong done to the
grantee, since it does not deprive him of any thing which he could justly
call his own. What we here advance holds true of every sovereignwhom
the law does not expressly invest with the free and absolute disposal of
§217. Dona-
tions of the
sovereign.


386
book ii: nations in relation to other states
the national property: so dangerous a power is never to be founded on
presumption.
Immunities and privileges conferred by the mere liberality of thesov-
ereign are a kind of donations, and may be revoked in the same manner,
if they prove detrimental to the state. But a sovereign cannot revoke
them by his bare authority, unless he be absolute: and even in this case,
he ought to be cautious and moderate in the exertion of his power,unit-
ing an equal share of prudence and equity on the occasion. Immunities
granted for particular reasons, or with a view to some return, partake of
the nature of a burthensome contract, and can only be revoked in case
of abuse, or when they become incompatible with the safety of thestate.
And if they be suppressed on this latter account, an indemniﬁcation is
due to those who enjoyed them. <229>
chapter xv
Of the Faith of Treaties.
Though we have sufﬁciently established (§§163 and 164) the indispens-
able necessity of keeping promises, and observing treaties, the subject is
of such importance, that we cannot forbear considering it here in a more
general view, as interesting, not only to the contracting parties, but like-
wise to all nations, and to the universal society of mankind.
Every thing which the public safety renders inviolable is sacred in
society. Thus the person of the sovereign is sacred, because the safety of
the state requires that he should be in perfect security, and above the
reach of violence: thus the people of Rome declared the persons of their
tribunes sacred,—considering it as essential to their own safety thattheir
defenders should be screened from all violence, and even exempt from
fear. Every thing, therefore, which the common safety of mankind and
the peace and security of human society require to be held inviolable, is
a thing that should be sacred among nations.
Who can doubt that treaties are in the number of those things that
are to be held sacred by nations? By treaties the most important affairs
are determined; by them the pretensions of sovereigns are regulated; on
§218. What is
sacred among
nations.
§219. Treaties
are sacred be-
tween nations.


chapter xv
387
them nations are to depend for the acknowledgement of their rights,
and the security of their dearest interests. Between bodies politic,—be-
tween sovereigns who acknowledge no superior on earth,—treaties are
the only means of adjusting their various pretensions,—of establishing
ﬁxed rules of conduct,—of ascertaining what theyareentitledtoexpect,
and what they have to depend on. But treaties are no better than empty
words, if nations do not consider them as respectable engagements,—
as rules which are to be inviolably observed by sovereigns, and held sa-
cred throughout the whole earth.
The faith of treaties,—that ﬁrm and sincere resolution,—that invar-
iable constancy in fulﬁlling our engagements,—of which we make pro-
fession in a treaty, is therefore to be held sacred and inviolable between
the nations of the earth, whose safety and repose it secures: and if man-
kind be not wilfully deﬁcient in their duty to themselves, infamy must
ever be the portion of him who violates his faith.
He who violates his treaties, violates at the same time the law of na-
tions; for he disregards the faith of treaties,—that faith which the law
of nations declares sacred; and, so far as depends on him, he renders it
vain and ineffectual. Doubly guilty, he does an injury to his ally, he does
an injury to all nations, and inﬂicts a wound on the great society of
mankind. “On the ob-<230>servance and execution of treaties,” said a
respectable sovereign, “depends all the security which princes and states
have with respect to each other: and no dependence couldhenceforward
be placed in future conventions, if the existing ones were not to be
observed.”*
As all nations are interested in maintaining the faith of treaties, and
causing it to be every-where considered as sacred and inviolable, so like-
wise they are justiﬁable in forming a confederacy for the purpose of re-
pressing him who testiﬁes a disregard for it,—who openly sports with
it,—who violates and tramples it under foot. Such a man is a public
enemy who saps the foundations of the peace and common safety of
nations. But we should be careful not to extend this maxim to the prej-
* Resolution of the States-General, of the 15th of March 1726, in answer to the
Memorial of the Marquis de St Philip, Embassador of Spain.
§220. The
faith of trea-
ties is sacred.
§221. He who
violates his
treaties,
violates the
law of nations.
§222. Right of
nations against
him who disre-
gards the faith
of treaties.


388
book ii: nations in relation to other states
udiceof thatlibertyandindependencetowhicheverynationhasaclaim.
When a sovereign breaks his treaties, or refuses to fulﬁl them, this does
not immediately imply that he considers them as empty names, and that
he disregards the faith of treaties: he may have good reasons forthinking
himself liberated from his engagements; and other sovereigns have not
a right to judge him. It is the sovereign who violates his engagementson
pretences that are evidently frivolous, or who does not even think it
worth his while to allege any pretence whatever, togiveacolourablegloss
to his conduct, and cast a veil over his want of faith,—it is such a sov-
ereign, who deserves to be treated as an enemy of the human race.
In treating of religion, in the ﬁrst book of this work, we could not
avoid giving several instances of the enormous abuses which the popes
formerly made of their authority. There was one in particular,whichwas
equally injurious to all states, and subversive of the law of nations. Sev-
eral popes have undertaken to break the treaties of sovereigns; they car-
ried their daring audacity so far as to release a contracting power from
his engagements, and to absolve him from the oaths by which he had
conﬁrmed them. Cesarini, legate of pope Eugenius the Fourth, wishing
to break the treaty which Uladislaus king of Poland and Hungary had
concluded with the sultan Amurath,48 pronounced, in the pope’s name,
the king’s absolution from his oaths.* In those times of ignorance, peo-
ple thought themselves really bound by nothingbuttheiroaths,andthey
attributed to the pope the power of absolving them from oaths of every
kind. Uladislaus renewed hostilities against the Turks: but that prince,
in other respects worthy of a better fate, paid dearly for his perﬁdy, or
rather for his superstitious weakness: he perished, with his army, near
Varna:49—a loss which was fatal to Christendom, and brought on her
by her spiritual head. The following epitaph was written on Uladislaus:
<231>
* History of Poland by the Chevalier de Solignac [[La Pimpie Solignac]], vol. iv.
112. He quotes Dlugoss, Neugebauer, Sarnicki, Herburt, De Fulstin, &c.
48. Pope Eugene IV, r. 1431–47; King Vladislaus III of Poland, r. 1434–44; Sultan
Amurath (Murad) II, r. 1421–51.
49. In 1444.
§223. The law
of nations
violated by
the pope.


chapter xv
389
Romulidae Cannas, ego Varnam clade notavi.
Discite, mortales, non temerare ﬁdem.
Me nisi pontiﬁces jussissent rumpere foedus,
Non ferret Scythicum Pannonis ora jugum.50
Pope John XII.51 declared null the oath which the emperor Louis of
Bavaria, and his competitor Frederic of Austria, had mutually taken
when the emperor set the latter at liberty.52 Philip duke of Burgundy,
abandoning the alliance of the English, procured from the pope and the
council of Basil an absolution from his oath. And at a time when the
revival of letters and the establishment of the reformation should have
rendered the popes more circumspect, the legate Caraffa, in order to
induce Henry II.53 of France to a renewal of hostilities, had theaudacity
to absolve him, in 1556, from the oath he had made to observe the truce
of Vaucelles.* The famous peace of Westphalia displeasing the pope54
on many accounts, he did not conﬁne himself to protesting against the
articles of a treaty in which all Europe was interested: he published a
bull in which, from his own certain knowledge, and fullecclesiasticalpower,
he declared several articles of the treaty null, vain, invalid, iniquitous,
* On these facts, see the French and German historians.—“Thus war was deter-
mined on in favour of the pope: and after cardinal Caraffa, by virtue of the powers
vested in him by his holiness, had absolved the king from the oaths he had taken in
ratiﬁcation of the truce, he even permitted him to attack the emperor and his son
without a previous declaration of hostilities.”De Thou [[JacquesAugustedeThou]],
lib. xvii. [[The quoted material and the source were added in the 1773/1797editions.]]
50. “The sons of Romulus mark Cannae by its disaster, and so I mark Varna. /
Learn, ye mortals, not to violate faith. / If the bishops had not ordered me to break
the treaty, / the shores of Pannonia would not have to bear the Scythian yoke”(trans.
Eds.).
51. The text is in error here. It should read: Pope John XXII.
52. Frederick of Austria promised to recognize Louis IV of Bavaria as Holy Ro-
man Emperor in return for his freedom, having been defeated at the battle of Mu¨hl-
dorf (1322). He returned to prison having failed to persuade his brothers to also rec-
ognize Louis IV. Pope John XXII (r. 1316–34) declared the oath invalid,andFrederick
was given the title “King of the Romans.”
53. Henry II, king of France, r. 1547–59.
54. Pope Innocent X (r. 1644–55) condemned the Treaty of Westphalia (1648) in
his bull Zelo Domus Dei.

390
book ii: nations in relation to other states
unjust, condemned, reprobated, frivolous, void of force and effect, and that
nobody was bound to observe them or any of them, though they were con-
ﬁrmed by oath.—Nor was this all:—his holiness, assuming the tone of
an absolute master, proceeds thus—And nevertheless, for the greater pre-
caution, and as much as need be, from the same motions, knowledge, delib-
erations, and plenitude of power, we condemn, reprobate, break,annul,and
deprive of all force and effect, the said articles, and all the other things prej-
udicial to the above, &c.* Who does not see, that these daring acts of the
popes, which were formerly very frequent, were violations of the law of
nations, and directly tended to destroy all the bands that could unite
mankind, and to sap the foundations of their tranquillity, or to render
the pope sole arbiter of their affairs?
But who can restrain his indignation at seeing this strange abuse au-
thorised by princes themselves? In the treaty concluded at Vincennes,
between Charles V. king of France, and Robert Stuart55 king of Scot-
land, in 1371, it was agreed, that the pope should absolve the Scots from all
the oaths they had taken in swearing to a truce with the English, and that
he should promise never to absolve the French or Scots from the oaths they
were about to make in swearing to the new treaty.† <232>
The custom, generally received in former times, of swearing to the
observance of treaties, had furnished the popes with a pretext for
claiming the power of breaking them, by absolving the contracting
parties from their oaths. But in the present day, even children know
that an oath does not constitute the obligation to keep a promise or a
treaty: it only gives an additional strength to that obligation, by calling
God to bear witness. A man of sense, a man of honour, does not think
himself less bound by his word alone, by his faith once pledged, than
if he had added the sanction of an oath. Cicero would not have us to
make much difference between a perjurer and a liar. “The habit of lying
(says that great man) paves the way to perjury. Whoever can be pre-
vailed on to utter a falsehood, may be easily won over to commit per-
* History of the Treaty of Westphalia by Father Bougeant, in 12mo, vol. vi.p. 413.
† Choisy’s History of Charles V. p. 282.
55. Charles V, king of France, r. 1364–80; Robert II, king of Scotland, r. 1371–90.
§224. This
abuse
authorised
by princes.
§225. Use
of an oath
in treaties.
It does not
constitute the
obligation.


chapter xv
391
jury: for the man who has once deviated from the line of truth, gen-
erally feels as little scruple in consenting to a perjury as to a lie. For,
what inﬂuence can the invocation of the gods have on the mind of him
who is deaf to the voice of conscience? The same punishment, there-
fore, which heaven has ordained for the perjurer, awaits also the liar:
for it is not on account of the formula of words in which the oath is
couched, but of the perﬁdy and villany displayed by the perjurer in
plotting harm against his neighbour, that the anger and indignationof
the gods is roused.”*
The oath does not then produce a new obligation: it only gives ad-
ditional force to the obligation imposed by the treaty, and in every thing
shares the same fate with it. Where the treaty is of its own nature valid
and obligatory, the oath (in itself a supererogatory obligation) is so too:
but where the treaty is void, the oath is void likewise.
The oath is a personal act; it can therefore only regard the person of
him who swears, whether he swears himself, or deputes another to swear
in his name. However, as this act does not produce a new obligation, it
makes no change in the nature of a treaty. Thus an alliance conﬁrmed
by oath is so conﬁrmed only with respect to him who has contracted it:
but if it be a real alliance, it survives him, and passes to his successors
as an alliance not conﬁrmed by oath.
For the same reason, since the oath can impose no other obligation
than that which results from the treaty itself, it gives no pre-eminence
to one treaty, to the prejudice of those that are not sworn to. And as, in
case of two treaties clashing with each other, the more ancient ally is to
be preferred (§167), the same <233> rule should be observed, even though
* At quid interest inter perjurum et mendacem? Qui mentiri solet, pejerare con-
suevit. Quem ego, ut mentiatur, inducere possum, ut pejeret, exorare facile potero:
nam qui semel a veritate deﬂexit, hic non majori religione ad perjurium quam ad
mendacium perduci consuevit. Quis enim deprecatione deorum, non conscientiae
ﬁde commovetur? Propterea, quae poena ab diis immortalibus perjuro, haec eadem
mendaci constituta est. Non enim ex pactione verborum quibus jusjurandum com-
prehenditur, sed ex perﬁdia et malitia per quam insidiae tenduntur alicui, dii im-
mortales hominibus irasci et succensere consueˆrunt. Cicer. Orat. pro Q. Roscio,
comoedo.
§226. It does
not change
the nature of
obligations.
§227. It gives
no pre-
eminence to
one treaty
above another.


392
book ii: nations in relation to other states
the more recent treaty has been conﬁrmed by an oath. In the same man-
ner, since it is not allowable to engage in treaties inconsistent with ex-
isting ones (§165), the circumstance of an oath will not justify such trea-
ties, nor give them sufﬁcient validity to supercede those which are
incompatible with them:—if it had such an effect, this would be a con-
venient mode for princes to rid themselves of their engagements.
Thus also an oath cannot give validity to a treaty that is of its own
nature invalid,—justify a treaty which is in itself unjust,—orimposeany
obligation to fulﬁl a treaty, however lawfully concluded, when an oc-
casion occurs in which the observance of it would be unlawful,—as, for
instance, if the ally to whom succours have been promised, undertakes
a war that is manifestly unjust. In short, every treaty made for a dis-
honourable purpose (§161), every treaty prejudicial to the state (§160),
or contrary to her fundamental laws (Book I. §265), being in its own
nature void,—the oath that may have been added to such a treaty, isvoid
likewise, and falls to the ground together with the covenant which it was
intended to conﬁrm.
The asseverations used in entering into engagements are forms of ex-
pression intended to give the greater force to promises. Thus, kings
promise in the most sacred manner, with good faith, solemnly, irrevocably,
and engage their royal word, &c. A man of honour thinks himself suf-
ﬁciently bound by his word alone: yet these asseverations are not useless,
inasmuch as they tend to prove that the contracting parties form their
engagements deliberately, and with a knowledge of what they are about.
Hence, consequently, the violation of such engagements becomes the
more disgraceful. With mankind, whose faith is so uncertain, every cir-
cumstance is to be turned to advantage: and since the sense of shame
operates more powerfully on their minds than the sentiment of duty, it
would be imprudent to neglect this method.
Afterwhatwehavesaidabove(§162),itwereunnecessarytoundertake
in this place to prove that the faith of treaties has no relation to the
difference of religion, and cannot in any manner depend upon it. The
monstrous maxim, that no faith is to be kept with heretics, mightformerly
raise its head amidst the madness of party, and the fury of superstition:
but it is at present generally detested.
§228. It
cannot give
force to a
treaty that
is invalid.
§229.
Asseverations.
§230. The
faith of trea-
ties does not
depend on the
difference of
religion.

chapter xv
393
If the security of him who stipulates for any thing in his own favour
prompts him to require precision, fulness, and the greatest clearness in
the expressions,—good faith demands, on the other hand, that each
party should express his promises clearly, and without the least ambi-
guity. The faith of treaties is basely prostituted by studying to couch
them in vague or equivocal terms, to introduce ambiguous expressions,
to reserve subjects of dispute, to over-reach those with whom we treat,
and outdo them in cunning and duplicity. Let the man who excels in
these arts boast of his happy talents, and esteem himself a keen nego-
<234>tiator: but reason and the sacred law of nature will class him as
far beneath a vulgar cheat, as the majesty of kings is exaltedaboveprivate
persons. True diplomatic skill consists in guarding against imposition,
not in practising it.
Subterfuges in a treaty are not less contrary to good faith. Hiscatholic
majesty Ferdinand, having concluded a treaty with thearchdukehisson-
in-law,56 thought he could evade it by privately protesting against the
treaty:—a puerile ﬁnesse! which, without giving any right to thatprince,
only exposed his weakness and duplicity.
The rules that establish a lawful interpretation of treaties are sufﬁ-
ciently important to be made the subject of a distinct chapter. For the
present let us simply observe that an evidently false interpretation is the
grossest imaginable violation of the faith of treaties. He that resorts to
such an expedient, either impudently sports with that sacred faith, or
sufﬁciently evinces his inward conviction of the degree of moral tur-
pitude annexed to the violation of it: he wishes to act a dishonest part,
and yet preserve the character of an honest man: he is a puritanical im-
postor who aggravates his crime by the addition of a detestable hypoc-
risy. Grotius quotes several instances of evidently false interpretations
put upon treaties:*—the Plateans having promised the Thebans to re-
store their prisoners, restored them after they had put them to death.
* De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap xvi. §5.
56. Ferdinand II, king of Spain, r. 1479–1516; Philip I of Castile, son-in-law of
Ferdinand, r. 1478–1506.
§231. Precau-
tions to be
taken in word-
ing treaties.
§232. Sub-
terfuges in
treaties.
§233. An
evidently false
interpretation
inconsistent
with the faith
of treaties.


394
book ii: nations in relation to other states
Pericles57 having promised to spare the lives of such of the enemy as laid
down their arms,* ordered all those to be killed who had iron clasps to
their cloaks. ARomangeneral†havingagreedwithAntiochus58torestore
him half of his ﬂeet, caused each of the ships to be sawed in two. All
these interpretations are as fraudulent as that of Rhadamistus,59 who,
according to Tacitus’s account,‡ having sworn to Mithridates60 that he
would not employ either poison or the steel against him, caused him to
be smothered under a heap of clothes.
Our faith may be tacitly pledged, as well as expressly: it is sufﬁcient
that it be pledged, in order to become obligatory: the manner can make
no difference in the case. The tacit pledging of faith is founded on atacit
consent; and a tacit consent is that which is, by fair deduction, inferred
from our actions. Thus, as Grotius observes,§ whatever is includedinthe
nature of certain acts which are agreed upon, is tacitly comprehended
in the agreement: or, in other words, every thing which is indispensably
necessary to give effect to the articles agreed on, is tacitly granted. If, for
instance, a promise is made to a hostile army who have advanced far into
the country, that they shall be allowed to return home in safety, it is
manifest that they cannot <235> be refused provisions; for they cannot
return without them. In the same manner, in demanding or accepting
an interview, full security is tacitly promised. Livy justly says, that the
Gallo-Greeks violated the law of nationsinattackingtheconsulManlius
at the time when he was repairing to the place of interview towhichthey
had invited him.¶ The emperor Valerian having been defeated by Sapor
* Literally, “laid down their iron or steel”: hence the perﬁdious quibble on the
word iron, which cannot be so well rendered in English.
† Q. Fabius Labeo [[Quintus Fabius Labeo, Roman consul ca. 183 b.c.]], accord-
ing to Valerius Maximus. Livy makes no mention of the transaction.
‡ Annal. lib. xii.
§ Lib. iii. cap. xxiv. §1 [[Law of War and Peace]].
¶ Livy, lib. xxxviii. cap. xxv.
57. Pericles, 495–429 b.c., Athenian statesman, orator, and general.
58. Antiochus IV Epiphanes, ruler of the Seleucid Empire 215–163 b.c.
59. Rhadamistus, ruler of Iberia a.d. 51–55, became kingof Armenia,havingkilled
his uncle and married the uncle’s daughter, Zenobia.
60. Mithridates, king of Armenia a.d. 42–55, uncle of Rhadamistus.
§234. Faith
tacitly pledged.


chapter xvi
395
king of Persia,61 sent to him to sue for peace. Sapor declared that he
wished to treat with the emperor in person; and Valerian having con-
sented to the interview without any suspicion of fraud, was carried off
by the perﬁdious enemy, who kept him a prisoner till his death, and
treated him with the most brutal cruelty.*
Grotius, in treating of tacit conventions, speaks of those in whichthe
parties pledge their faith by mute signs.† But we ought not to confound
these two kinds of tacit conventions: for that consent which is sufﬁ-
ciently notiﬁed by a sign, is an express consent, as clearly as if it had been
signiﬁed by the voice. Words themselves are but signs established bycus-
tom: and there are mute signs which established custom renders as clear
and as express as words. Thus, at the present day, by displaying a white
ﬂag, a parley is demanded, as expressly as it could be done by the use of
speech. Security is tacitly promised to the enemy who advances upon
this invitation.
chapter xvi
Of Securities given for the Observance of Treaties.
Convinced by unhappy experience, that the faith of treaties, sacred and
inviolable as it ought to be, does not always afford a sufﬁcient assurance
that they shall be punctually observed,—mankind have sought for se-
curities againstperﬁdy,—formethods,whoseefﬁcacyshouldnotdepend
on the good-faith of the contracting parties. A guaranty is one of these
means. When those who make a treaty of peace, or any other treaty, are
not perfectly easy with respect to its observance, they require the guar-
anty of a powerful sovereign. The guarantee promises to maintain the
conditions of the treaty, and to cause it to be observed. As he may ﬁnd
himself obliged to make use of force against the party who attempts to
* The Life of Valerian in Crevier’s History of the Emperors.
† Lib. iii. cap. xxiv. §5 [[Law of War and Peace]].
61. Valerian, emperor of Rome, r. a.d. 253–60; Sapor I, king of Persia, r. a.d.
241–71.
§235.
Guaranty.


396
book ii: nations in relation to other states
violate his promises, it is an engagement that no sovereign oughttoenter
into lightly, and without good reason. Princes indeed seldom enter into
it unless when they have an indirect interest in the observance of the
treaty, or are induced by particular relations of friendship. The <236>
guaranty may be promised equally to all the contracting parties, to some
of them, or even to one alone: but it is commonly promised to all in
general. It may also happen, when several sovereigns enter into a com-
mon alliance, that they all reciprocally pledge themselves to each other,
as guarantees for its observance. The guaranty is a kind of treaty, by
which assistance and succours are promised to any one, in case he has
need of them, in order to compel a faithlessallytofulﬁlhisengagements.
Guaranty being given in favour of the contracting powers, or of one
of them, it does not authorise the guarantee to interfere in the execution
of the treaty, or to enforce the observance of it, unasked, and of his own
accord. If, by mutual consent, the parties think proper to deviate from
the tenor of the treaty, to alter some of the articles, or to cancel it al-
together,—or if one party be willing to favour the other by a relaxation
of any claim,—they have a right to do this, and the guarantee cannot
oppose it. Simply bound by his promise to support the party whoshould
have reason to complain of the infraction of the treaty, he has acquired
no rights for himself. The treaty was not made for him; for, had that
been the case, he would have been concerned, not merely as a guarantee,
but as a principal in the contract. This observation is of great impor-
tance: for care should be taken, lest, under colour of being a guarantee,
a powerful sovereign should render himself the arbiter of the affairs of
his neighbours, and pretend to give them laws.
But it is true, that if the parties make any change in the articles of
the treaty without the consent and concurrence of the guarantee, the
latter is no longer bound to adhere to the guaranty; for the treaty thus
changed is no longer that which he guarantied.
As no nation is obliged to do any thing for another nation, whichthat
other is herself capable of doing, it naturally follows that the guarantee
is not bound to give his assistance except where the party to whom he
has granted his guaranty is of himself unable to obtain justice.
If there arises any dispute between the contracting parties respecting
§236. It gives
the guarantee
no right to in-
terfere unasked
in the execu-
tion of a treaty.
§237. Nature
of the obliga-
tion it imposes.


chapter xvi
397
the sense of any article of the treaty, the guarantee is not immediately
obliged to assist him in favour of whom he has given his guaranty. As
he cannot engage to support injustice, he is to examine, and to search
for the true sense of the treaty, to weigh the pretensions of him who
claims his guaranty; and if he ﬁnds them ill founded, he may refuse to
support them, without failing in his engagements.
It is no less evident that the guaranty cannot impair the rights of any
one who is not a party to the treaty. If, therefore, it happens that the
guarantied treaty proves derogatory to the rights of those who are not
concerned in it,—the treaty being unjust in this point, the guarantee is
in no wise bound to procure the performance of it; for, as we haveshewn
above, he can never have incurred an obligation to support injustice.
This was the reason alleged by France, when, notwithstanding her hav-
ing guarantied <237> the famous pragmatic sanction of Charles VI. she
declared for the house of Bavaria, in opposition to the heiress of that
emperor.62 This reason is incontestably a good one, in the general view
of it: and the only question to be decided at that time, was, whether the
court of France made a just application of it.
Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites. 63
I shall observe on this occasion, that, according to common usage,
the term guaranty is often taken in a sense somewhat different from that
we have given to it. For instance, most of the powers of Europe guar-
antied the act by which Charles VI. had regulated the succession to his
dominions;—sovereigns sometimes reciprocally guaranty their respec-
tive states. But we should rather denominate those transactions treaties
of alliance, for the purpose, in the former case, of maintaining that rule
of succession,—and, in the latter, of supporting the possession of those
states.
62. The Pragmatic Sanction was issued as a decree on April 19, 1713, by the Holy
Roman Emperor Charles VI, with the intent that all of his Hapsburg kingdoms
would descend without partition to his eldest daughter, Maria-Theresa.
63. “It is not for us to end such great disputes” Virgil, Eclogues, III (trans. Eds.).
§238. The
guaranty
cannot impair
the rights of a
third party.


398
book ii: nations in relation to other states
The guaranty naturally subsists as long as the treaty that is the object
of it; and in case of doubt, this ought always to be presumed, since it is
required, and given, for the security of the treaty. But there is no reason
which can naturally prevent its limitation to a certain period,—to the
lives of the contracting powers, to that of the guarantee, &c. In a word,
whatever we have said of treaties in general, is equally applicable to a
treaty of guaranty.
When there is question of things which another may do or give as
well as he who promises, as for instance, the paymentof asumof money,
it is safer to demand a security than a guaranty; for the surety is bound
to make good the promise in default of the principal,—whereas the
guarantee is only obliged to use his best endeavours to obtain a perfor-
mance of the promise from him who has made it.
A nation may put some of her possessions into the hands of another,
for the security of her promises, debts, or engagements. If she thus de-
posits movable property, she gives pledges. Poland formerly pledged a
crown and other jewels to the sovereigns of Prussia. But sometimes
towns and provinces are given in pawn. If they are only pledged by a
deed which assigns them as security for a debt, they serve as a mortgage:
if they are actually put into the hands of the creditor, or of him with
whom the affair has been transacted, he holds them as pledges: and if
the revenues are ceded to him as an equivalent for the interest of the
debt, the transaction is called a compact of antichresis.
The right which the possession of a town or province confers upon
him who holds it in pledge, extends no further than to secure the pay-
ment of what is due to him, or the performance of the promise that has
been made to him. He may therefore retain the town or the province in
his hands, till he is satisﬁed; but he has no right to make any change in
it; for that town, or <238> that country, does not belong to him as pro-
prietor. He cannot even interfere in the government of it, beyond what
is required for his own security, unless the empire, or the exercise of
sovereignty, has been expressly made over to him. This last point is not
naturally to be presumed, since it is sufﬁcient for the security of the
mortgagee, that the country is put into his hands, and under his power.
Further, he is obliged, like every other person who has received a pledge,
§239. Dura-
tion of the
guaranty.
§240. Treaties
with surety.
§241. Pawns,
securities, and
mortgages.
§242. A
nation’s right
over what she
holds as a
pledge.


chapter xvi
399
to preserve the country he holds as a security, and, as far as in his power,
to prevent its suffering any damage or dilapidation: he is responsible for
it; and if the country is ruined through his fault, he is bound to indem-
nify the state that intrusted him with the possession of it. If the sover-
eignty is deposited in his hands together with thecountryitself,heought
to govern it according to its constitution, and precisely in the same man-
ner as the sovereign of the country was obliged to govern it; for thelatter
could only pledge his lawful right.
As soon as the debt is paid, or the treaty is fulﬁlled, the term of the
security expires, and he who holds a town or a province by this title, is
bound to restore it faithfully, in the same state in which he received it,
so far as this depends on him.
But to those who have no law but their avarice, or their ambition,—
who, like Achilles, place all their right in the point of their sword,*—a
tempting allurement now presents itself: they have recourse to a thou-
sand quibbles, a thousand pretences, to retain an important place, or a
country which is conveniently situated for their purposes. The subject
is too odious for us to allege examples: they are well enough known, and
sufﬁciently numerous to convince every sensible nation, that it is very
imprudent to make over such securities.
But if the debt be not paid at the appointed time, or if the treaty be
not fulﬁlled, what has been given in security, may be retained and ap-
propriated, or the mortgage seized, at least until the debt be discharged,
or a just compensation made. The house of Savoy had mortgaged the
country of Vaud to the cantons of Bern and Fribourg; and those two
cantons, ﬁnding that no payments were made, had recourse to arms,and
took possession of the country. The duke of Savoy, instead of imme-
diately satisfying their just demands, opposed force to force, and gave
them still further grounds of complaint: wherefore the cantons, ﬁnally
successful in thecontest,havesinceretainedpossessionof thatﬁnecoun-
* Jura negat sibi nata, nihil non arrogat armis. Horat. [[“He denies that laws
were madefor him,andthinksthateverythingshouldyieldtoarms”(saidof Achilles).
Horace, Ars poetica, 121.]]
§243. How
she is obliged
to restore it.
§244. How
she may
appropriate it
to herself.


400
book ii: nations in relation to other states
try, as well for the payment of the debt, as to defray the expenses of the
war, and to obtain a just indemniﬁcation.
Finally, there is, in the way of security, another precaution, of very
ancient institution, and much used among nations,—which is, to re-
quire hostages. These are persons of consequence, delivered up by the
promising party, to him with whom he enters into an engagement, and
to be detained by the latter until the performance of the promiseswhich
are made to him. In this <239> case, as well as in those abovementioned,
the transaction is a pignorary contract, in which free men are delivered
up, instead of towns, countries, or jewels. With respect to this contract,
therefore, we may conﬁne ourselves to those particular observations
which the difference of the things pledged renders necessary.
The sovereign who receives hostages, has no other right over them,
than that of securing their persons, in order to detain them till the entire
accomplishment of the promises of which they are the pledge. He may
therefore take precautions to prevent their escaping from him: but those
precautions should be moderated by humanity, towards men whom he
has no right to use ill; and they ought not to be extended beyond what
prudence requires.
It is pleasing to behold the European nations in the present age con-
tent themselves with the bare parole of their hostages. The English no-
blemen who were sent to France in that character in pursuance of the
treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, in 1748, to stay till the restitution of Cape
Breton, were solely bound by their word of honour, and lived at court,
and at Paris, rather as ministers of their nation, than as hostages.
The liberty of the hostages is the only thing pledged: and if he who
has given them breaks his promise, they may be detained in captivity.
Formerly they were in such cases put to death;—an inhuman cruelty,
founded on an error. It was imagined that the sovereignmightarbitrarily
dispose of the lives of his subjects, or that every man was the master of
his own life, and had a right to stake it as a pledge when he delivered
himself up as an hostage.
As soon as the engagements are fulﬁlled, the cause for which the
hostages were delivered no longer subsists: they then immediately be-
come free, and ought to be restored without delay. They ought also to
§245.
Hostages.
§246. What
right we have
over hostages.
§247. Their
liberty alone
is pledged.
§248. When
they are to be
sent back.


chapter xvi
401
be restored, if the reason for which they were demanded does not take
place: to detain them then, would be to abuse the sacred faith upon
which they were delivered. The perﬁdious Christiern II. king of Den-
mark,64 being delayed by contrary winds before Stockholm, and, to-
gether with his whole ﬂeet, ready to perish with famine,madeproposals
of peace: whereupon, the administrator, Steno,65 imprudentlytrusting
to his promises, furnished the Danes with provisions, and even gave
Gustavus and six other noblemen as hostages for the safety of the
king, who pretended to have a desire to come on shore: but, with the
ﬁrst fair wind, Christiern weighed anchor, and carried off the hos-
tages; thus repaying the generosity of his enemy by an infamous act of
treachery.*
Hostages being delivered on the faith of treaties, and he who receives
them, promising to restore them, as soon as the promise, of which they
are the surety, shall be fulﬁlled,—such engagements ought to be literally
accomplished: and the hostages should be really and faithfully restored
to their former condition, as soon as the accomplishment of thepromise
has disengaged <240> them. It is therefore not allowable to detain them
for any other cause; and I am astonished toﬁnd thatsomelearnedwriters
teach a contrary doctrine.† They ground their opinion upon the prin-
ciple which authorises a sovereign to seize and detain the subjects of
another state in order to compel their rulers to do him justice. The prin-
ciple is true; but the application is not just. These authors seem to have
overlooked the circumstance, that, were it not for the faith of the treaty
by virtue of which the hostage has been delivered, he would not be in
the power of that sovereign, nor exposed to be so easily seized; and that
the faith of such a treaty does not allow the sovereign to make any other
use of his hostage than that for which he was intended, or to take ad-
vantage of his detention beyond what has been expressly stipulated.The
* History of the Revolutions of Sweden. [[Rene´-Aubert de Vertot, History of the
Revolutions in Sweden.]]
† Grotius,lib.iii.cap.xx.§55[[Lawof WarandPeace]].—Wolﬁus,JusGent.§503.
64. Christiern (Christian) II, king of Denmark and Norway, r. 1513–23.
65. Regent Sten Sture (the Younger), r. 1512–20.
§249. Whether
they may be
detained on
any other
account.

402
book ii: nations in relation to other states
hostage is delivered for the security of a promise, and for that alone. As
soon, therefore, as the promise is fulﬁlled, the hostage, as we have just
observed, ought to be restored to his former condition. To tell him that
he is released as a hostage, but detained as a pledge for the security of
any other pretension, would be taking advantage of his situation as a
hostage, in evident violation of the spirit and even the letter of the con-
vention, according to which, as soon as the promise is accomplished,the
hostage is to be restored to himself and his country, and reinstated in
his pristine rank, as if he had never been a hostage. Without a rigid
adherence to this principle, it would no longer be safe to give hostages,
since princes might on every occasion easily devise some pretext for de-
taining them. Albert the Wise,66 duke of Austria, making war against
the city of Zurich in the year 1351, the two parties referred the decision
of their disputes toarbitrators,andZurichgavehostages.Thearbitrators
passed an unjust sentence, dictated by partiality. Zurich, nevertheless,
after having made a well-grounded complaint on the subject, deter-
mined to submit totheir decision.Butthedukeformednewpretensions,
and detained the hostages,* contrary to the faith of the compromise,
and in evident contempt of the law of nations.
But a hostage may be detained for his own actions, for crimes com-
mitted, or debts contracted in the country while he is in hostage there.
This is no violation of the faith of the treaty. In order to be sure of
recovering his liberty according to the terms of the treaty, the hostage
must not claim a right to commit, with impunity, any outrages against
the nation by which he is kept; and when he is about to depart, it is just
that he should pay his debts.
It is the party who gives the hostages, that is to provide for their sup-
port; for it is by his order, and for his service, that they are in hostage.
He who receives them for his own security is not bound to defray the
expense of their subsistence, but simply <241> that of their custody if
he thinks proper to set a guard over them.
* Tschudi, vol. i. p. 421.
66. Albert II, king of Austria, r. 1298–1358.
§250. They
may be
detained for
their own
actions.
§251. Of the
support of
hostages.


chapter xvi
403
The sovereign may dispose of his subjects for the service of the state;
he may therefore give them also as hostages; and the person who is nom-
inated for that purpose, is bound to obey, as he is on every otheroccasion
when commanded for the service of his country. But as the expenses
ought to be borne equally by the citizens, the hostage is entitled to be
defrayed and indemniﬁed at the public charge.
It is, evidently, a subject alone, who can be given as a hostage against
his will. With a vassal, the case is otherwise. What he owes to the sov-
ereign, is determined by the conditions of his ﬁef; and he is bound to
nothing more. Accordingly, it is a decided point that a vassal cannot be
constrained to go as a hostage, unless he be at the same time a subject.
Whoever has a power to make treaties or conventions, may give and
receive hostages. For this reason, not only the sovereign, but also the
subordinate authorities, have a right to give hostages in the agreements
they make, according to the powers annexed to their ofﬁce, and the ex-
tent of their commission. The governor of a town, and the besieging
general, give and receive hostages for the security of the capitulation:
whoever is under their command, is bound to obey, if he is nominated
for that purpose.
Hostages ought naturally to be persons of consequence, since they
are required as a security. Persons of mean condition would furnish but
a feeble security, unless they were given in great numbers. Care is com-
monly taken to settle the rank of the hostages that are to be delivered;
and the violation of a compact in this particular is a ﬂagrant dereliction
of good-faith and honour. It was a shameful act of perﬁdy in La Tri-
mouille to give the Swiss only hostages from the dregs of the people,
instead of four of the principle citizens of Dijon, as had been stipulated
in the famous treaty we have mentioned above (§212). Sometimes the
principal persons of the state, and even princes, are given in hostage.
Francis I. gave his own sons as security for the treaty of Madrid.67
The sovereign who gives hostages ought to act ingenuously in the
affair,—giving them in reality as pledges of his word, and consequently
with the intention that they should be kept till the entire accomplish-
67. King Francis I of France (r. 1515–47) signed the Treaty of Madrid in 1526.
§252. A
subject cannot
refuse to be a
hostage.
§253. Rank of
the hostages.
§254. They
ought not to
make their
escape.


404
book ii: nations in relation to other states
ment of his promise. He cannot therefore approve of their making their
escape: and if they take such a step, so far from harbouring them, he is
bound to send them back. The hostage, on his side, conformably to the
presumed intentionof hissovereign,oughtfaithfullytoremainwithhim
to whom he is delivered, without endeavouring to escape. Cloelia made
her escape from the hands of Porsenna,68 to whom she had been deliv-
ered as a hostage: but the Romans sent her back, that they might not
incur the guilt of violating the treaty.* <242>
If the hostage happens to die, he who has given him is not obliged to
replace him, unless this was made a part of the agreement. The hostage
was a security required of him: that security is lost without any fault on
his side; and there exists no reason why he should be obliged to give
another.
If any one substitutes himself for a time in the place of a hostage,
and the hostage happens in the interim to die a natural death, the sub-
stitute is free: for in this case, things are to be replaced in the same sit-
uation in which they would have been if the hostage had not been per-
mitted to absent himself, and substitute another in his stead: and for the
same reason, the hostage is not free by the death of him who has taken
his place only for a time. It would be quite the contrary, if the hostage
had been exchanged for another: the former would be absolutely free
from all engagement; and the person who had taken his place would
alone be bound.
If a prince, who has been given in hostage, succeeds to the crown, he
ought to be released on the delivery of another sufﬁcient hostage, or a
number of others, who shall together constitute an aggregate security
equivalent to that which he himself afforded when he was originally
given. This is evident from the treaty itself, which did not import that
the king should be a hostage. The detention of the king’s person by a
foreign power is a thing of too interesting a nature to admit a presump-
* Et Romani pignus pacis ex foedere restituerunt. [[“And the Romans returned
the pledge of peace, as the treaty required.”]] Tit. Liv. [[History of Rome]] lib. ii. cap.
xiii.
68. Lars Porsenna of Clusium, king of the Etruscans, ca. 500 b.c.
§255. Whether
a hostage who
dies is to be
replaced.
§256. Of him
who takes the
place of a
hostage.
§257. A
hostage
succeeding to
the crown.


chapter xvi
405
tion that the state had intended to expose herself to the consequences
of such an event. Good-faith ought to preside in all conventions; and
the manifest or justly presumed intention of the contracting parties
ought to be adhered to. If Francis I. had died after having given his sons
as hostages, certainly the dauphin should have been released: for he had
been delivered only with a view of restoring the king to his kingdom;
and if the emperor had detained him, that view would have been frus-
trated, since the king of France would still have been a captive. It is
evident that, in this reasoning, I proceed on the supposition that no vi-
olation of the treaty has taken place on the part of the state which has
given a prince in hostage. In case that state had broken its promise, ad-
vantage might reasonably be taken of an event which rendered the hos-
tage still more valuable, and his release the more necessary.
The liability of a hostage, as that of a city or a country, expires with
the treaty which it was intended to secure (§§243, 248):andconsequently
if the treaty is personal, the hostage is free at the moment when one of
the contracting powers happens to die.
The sovereign who breaks his word after having given hostages, does
aninjurynotonlytotheothercontractingpower,butalsotothehostages
themselves. For though subjects are indeed bound to obey their sover-
eign who gives them in hostage, that sovereign has not a right wantonly
to sacriﬁce their liberty, and expose their lives to danger without just
reasons. Delivered <243> up as a security for their sovereign’s promise,
not for the purpose of suffering any harm,—if he entails misfortune on
them by violating his faith, he covers himself withdoubleinfamy.Pawns
and mortgages serve as securities for what is due; and their acquisition
indemniﬁes the party to whom the other fails in his engagements. Hos-
tages are rather pledges of the faith of him who gives them; and it is
supposed that he would abhor the idea of sacriﬁcing innocent persons.
But if particular conjunctures oblige a sovereign to abandon the hos-
tages,—if, for example, the party who has received them violates his en-
gagements in the ﬁrst instance, and, in consequence of his violation,the
treaty can no longer be accomplished without exposing the state to dan-
ger,—no measure should be left untried for the delivery of those un-
fortunate hostages; and the state cannot refuse to compensate them for
§258. The
liability of the
hostage ends
with the treaty.
§259. The
violation of
the treaty is an
injury done to
the hostages.


406
book ii: nations in relation to other states
their sufferings, and to make them amends, either in their own persons,
or in those of their relatives.
At the moment when the sovereign, who has given the hostage, has
violated his faith, the latter ceases to retain the character of a hostage,
and becomes a prisoner to the party who had received him, and who has
now a right to detain him in perpetual captivity. But it becomes a gen-
erous prince to refrain from an exertion of his rights at the expense of
an innocent individual. And as the hostage is no longer bound by any
tie to his own sovereign who has perﬁdiously abandoned him,—if he
chooses to transfer his allegiance to the prince who is now the arbiter of
his fate, the latter may acquire a useful subject, instead of a wretched
prisoner, the troublesome object of his commiseration. Or he may lib-
erate and dismiss him, on settling with him the conditions.
We have already observed that the life of a hostage cannot be lawfully
taken away on account of the perﬁdy of the party who has delivered
him. The custom of nations, the most constant practice, cannot justify
such an instance of barbarous cruelty, repugnant to the law of nature.
Even at a time when that dreadful custom was but too much authorised,
the great Scipio publicly declared that he would not suffer his vengeance
to fail on innocent hostages, but on the persons themselves who had
incurred the guilt of perﬁdy, and that he was incapable of punishingany
but armed enemies.* The emperor Julian made the same declaration.†
All that such a custom can produce, is impunity among the nations who
practise it. Whoever is guilty of it cannot complain that another is so
too: but every nation may and ought to declare, that she considers the
action as a barbarity injurious to human nature. <244>
* Tit. Liv. [[History of Rome]] lib. xxviii. cap. xxxiv.
† See Grotius, lib. iii. cap. xi. §18, not. 2 [[Law of War and Peace]].
§260. The fate
of the hostage,
when he who
has given him
fails in his
engagements.
§261. Of the
right founded
on custom.


chapter xvii
407
chapter xvii
Of the Interpretation of Treaties.
If the ideas of men were always distinct and perfectly determinate,—if,
for the expression of those ideas, they had none but proper words, no
terms but such as wereclear,precise,andsusceptibleonlyof onesense,—
there would never be any difﬁculty in discovering their meaning in the
words by which they intended to express it: nothing more would be nec-
essary, than to understand the language. But, even on this supposition,
the art of interpretation would still not be useless. In concessions, con-
ventions, and treaties, in all contracts, as well as in the laws, it is im-
possible to foresee and point out all the particular cases that may arise:
we decree, we ordain, we agree upon certain things, and express them
in general terms; and though all the expressions of a treaty should be
perfectly clear, plain, and determinate, the true interpretationwouldstill
consist in making, in all the particular cases that present themselves, a
just application of what has been decreed in a general manner. But this
is not all:—conjunctures vary, and produce new kinds of cases, thatcan-
not be brought within the terms of the treaty or the law, except by in-
ferences drawn from the general views of the contracting parties, or of
the legislature. Between different clauses, there will be found contradic-
tions and inconsistencies, real or apparent; and the question is, to rec-
oncile such clauses, and point out the path to be pursued. But the case
is much worse if we consider that fraud seeks to take advantage even of
the imperfection of language, and that men designedly throw obscurity
and ambiguity into their treaties, in order to be provided with a pretence
for eluding them upon occasion. It is therefore necessary to establish
rules founded on reason, and authorised by the law of nature, capable
of diffusing light over what is obscure, of determiningwhatisuncertain,
and of frustrating the views of him who acts with duplicity in forming
the compact. Let us begin with those that tend particularly to this last
end,—with those maxims of justice and equity which are calculated to
repress fraud, and to prevent the effect of its artiﬁces.
§262. Neces-
sity of estab-
lishing rules of
interpretation.

408
book ii: nations in relation to other states
The ﬁrst general maxim of interpretation is, that It is not allowable to
interpret what has no need of interpretation. When a deed is worded in
clear and precise terms,—when its meaning is evident, and leads to no
absurd conclusion,—there can be no reason for refusing to admit the
meaning which such deed naturally presents. To go elsewhere in search
of conjectures in order to restrict or extend it, is but an attempt to elude
it. If this dangerous method be once admitted, there will be no deed
which it will not render useless. However luminous each clause may
<245> be,—however clear and precise the terms in which the deed is
couched,—all this will be of no avail, if it be allowed to go in quest of
extraneous arguments to prove that it is not to beunderstoodinthesense
which it naturally presents.*
Those cavillers, who dispute the sense of a clear and determinate ar-
ticle, are accustomed to seek their frivolous subterfuges in the pretended
intentions and views which they attribute to its author. It would be very
often dangerous to enter with them into the discussion of those sup-
posed views, that are not pointed out in the piece itself. The following
rule is better calculated to foil such cavillers, and will at once cut short
all chicanery:—If he who could and ought to have explained himself clearly
and fully, has not done it, it is the worse for him: he cannot be allowed to
introduce subsequent restrictions which he has not expressed. This is a
maxim of the Roman law: Pactionem obscuram iis nocere, in quorum fuit
potesiate legem apertius conscribere.†69 The equity of this rule is glaringly
obvious, and its necessity is not less evident. There will be no security
in conventions, no stability in grants or concessions, if they may be ren-
* Standum omnino est iis, quae verbis expressis, quorum manifestus est signiﬁ-
catus, indicata fuerunt, nisi omnem a negotiis humanis certitudinem removere vo-
lueris. Wolf. Jus Nat. par. vii. n. 822. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
† [[Justinian’s]] Digest. lib. ii. tit. xiv. de Pactis, leg. 39.—See likewise Digest.lib.
xviii. tit. i. de Contrahenda Emptione, leg. 21. Labeo scripsit obscuritatem pacti no-
cere potius debere venditori, qui id dixerit, quam emptori; quia potuit re integra
apertius dicere. [[“Labeo wrote that obscurity in a contract should harm the vendor
who had spoken it rather than the purchaser, because he could have spoken more
clearly in the whole matter” (trans. Eds.).]]
69. “An obscure contract [should] injure those in whose power it was to write the
law more clearly.” Digesta Justiniana, liber 18.1.21.
§263.
1st General
maxim: it is
not allowable
to interpret
what has no
need of inter-
pretation.
§264.
2d General
maxim: if he
who could and
ought to have
explained
himself, has
not done it, it
is to his own
detriment.


chapter xvii
409
dered nugatory by subsequent limitations, which ought to have been
originally speciﬁed in the deed, if they were in the contemplation of the
contracting parties.
The third general maxim, or principle, on the subject of interpreta-
tion is, that Neither the one nor the other of the parties interested in the
contract has a right to interpret the deed or treaty according to his own fancy.
For if you are at liberty to afﬁx whatever meaning you please to my
promise, you will have the power of obliging me to do whatever you
choose, contrary to my intention, and beyond my real engagements:and
on the other hand, if I am allowed to explain my promises as I please, I
may render them vain and illusory, by giving them a meaning quite dif-
ferent from that which they presented to you, and in which you must
have understood them at the time of your accepting them.
On every occasion when a person could and ought to have made known
his intention, we assume for true against him what he has sufﬁciently de-
clared. This is an incontestable principle, applied to treaties; for if they
are not a vain play of words, the contracting parties ought to express
themselves in them with truth, and according to their real intentions. If
the intention which is sufﬁcientlydeclaredwerenottobetakenof course
as the true intention of him who speaks and enters into engagements,
it would be perfectly useless to form contracts or treaties.
But it is here asked, which of the contracting parties ought to have
his expressions considered as the more decisive, with respect to the true
meaning of the contract,—whether we should lay a <246> greater stress
on the words of him who makes the promise than on those of the party
who stipulates for its performance?—As the force and obligation of
every contract arises from a perfect promise,—and the person who
makes the promise is no further engaged than his will is sufﬁciently de-
clared,—it is very certain, that, in order to discover the true meaning of
the contract, attention ought principally to be paid to the words of the
promising party. For he voluntarily binds himself by his words; and we
take for true against him, whathehas sufﬁcientlydeclared.Thisquestion
seems to have originated from the manner in which conventions are
sometimes made: the one party offers the conditions, and the other ac-
cepts them; that is to say, the former proposes what he requires that the
§265.
3d General
maxim: neither
of thecontract-
ing parties has
a right to inter-
pret the treaty
according to
his own fancy.
§266.
4th General
maxim: what
is sufﬁciently
declared, is to
be taken for
true.
§267. We
ought to
attend rather
to the words
of the person
promising,
than to those
of the party
stipulating.


410
book ii: nations in relation to other states
other shall oblige himself to perform, and the latter declares the obli-
gations into which he really enters. If the words of him who accepts the
conditions bear relation to the words of him who offers them, it is cer-
tainly true that we ought to lay our principal stress on the expressions
of the latter; but this is because the person promising is considered as
merely repeating them in order to form his promise. The capitulations
of besieged towns may here serve us for an example. The besieged party
proposes the conditions on which he is willing to surrender the place:
the besiegeracceptsthem: theexpressionsof theformerlaynoobligation
on the latter, unless so far as he adopts them. He who accepts the con-
ditions is in reality the promising party; and it is in his words that we
ought to seek for the true meaning of thearticles,whetherhehashimself
chosen and formed his expressions, or adopted those of the other party
by referring to them in his promise. But still we must bear in mind the
maxim above laid down, viz. that what he has sufﬁciently declared, is to
be taken as true against him. I proceed to explain myself more particu-
larly on this subject.
In the interpretation of a treaty, or of any other deed whatsoever, the
question is, to discover what the contractingpartieshaveagreedupon,—
to determine precisely, on any particular occasion, what has been prom-
ised and accepted,—that is to say, not only what one of the parties in-
tended to promise, but also what the othermustreasonablyandcandidly
have supposed to be promised to him,—what has been sufﬁciently de-
clared to him, and what must have inﬂuenced him in his acceptance.
Every deed, therefore, and every treaty, must be interpreted by certain ﬁxed
rules calculated to determine its meaning, as naturally understood by the
parties concerned, at the time when the deed was drawn up and accepted.
This is a ﬁfth principle.
As these rules are founded on right reason, and are consequently ap-
proved and prescribed by the law of nature, every man, every sovereign,
is obliged to admit and to follow them. Unless certain rules be admitted
for determining the sense in which the expressions are to be taken, trea-
ties will be only empty words; nothing can be agreed upon with security,
and it will be <247> almost ridiculous to place any dependence on the
effect of conventions.
§268.
5th General
maxim: the
interpretation
ought to be
made accord-
ing to certain
rules.


chapter xvii
411
But as sovereigns acknowledge no common judge, no superior that
can oblige them to adopt an interpretation founded on just rules, the
faith of treaties constitutes, in this respect, all the security of the con-
tracting powers. That faith is no less violated by a refusal to admit an
evidently fair interpretation, than by an open infraction. It is the same
injustice, the same want of good-faith; nor is its turpitude rendered less
odious by being cloaked up in the subtilties of fraud.
Let us now enter into the particular rules on which the interpretation
ought to be formed, in order to be just and fair. Since the sole object of
the lawful interpretation of a deed ought to be the discovery of the
thoughts of the author or authors of that deed,—whenever we meet with
any obscurity in it, we are to consider what probably were the ideas of those
who drew up the deed, and to interpret it accordingly. This is the general
rule for all interpretations. It particularly serves to ascertain themeaning
of particular expressions whose signiﬁcation is not sufﬁciently deter-
minate. Pursuant to this rule, we should take those expressions in their
utmost latitude when it seems probable that the person speaking had in
contemplation every thing which, in that extensive sense, they are ca-
pable of designating: and, on the other hand, we ought to restrict their
meaning, if the author appears to have conﬁned his idea to what they
comprehend in their more limited signiﬁcation. Let us suppose that a
husband has bequeathed to his wife all his money. It is required to know
whether this expression means only his ready money, or whether it ex-
tends also to that which is lent out, and is due on notes and other se-
curities. If the wife is poor,—if she was beloved by her husband,—if
the amount of the ready money be inconsiderable, and the value of the
other property greatly superior to that of the money both in specie and
in paper,—there is every reason to presume that the husband meant to
bequeath to her as well the money due to him as that actually contained
in his coffers. On the other hand, if the woman be rich,—if the amount
of the ready specie be very considerable, and the money due greatly ex-
ceeds in value all the other property,—the probability is, that the hus-
band meant to bequeath to his wife his ready money only.
By the same rule, we are to interpret a clause in the utmost latitude
that the strict and appropriate meaning of the words will admit, if it
§269. The
faith of trea-
ties lays an
obligation to
follow these
rules.
§270. General
rule of inter-
pretation.


412
book ii: nations in relation to other states
appears that the author had in view every thing which that strict and
appropriate meaning comprehends: but we must interpret it in a more
limited sense when it appears probable that the author of the clause did
not mean to extend it to every thing which the strict propriety of the
terms might be made to include. As for instance, a father, who has an
only son, bequeaths to the daughter of his friend all his jewels. He has
a sword enriched withdiamonds,givenhimbyasovereign<248>prince.
In this case it is certainly very improbable that the testator had any in-
tention of making over that honourable badge of distinction to a family
of aliens. That sword, therefore, together with the jewels with which it
is ornamented, must be excepted from the legacy, and the meaning of
the words be restricted to his other jewels. But if the testator has neither
son nor heir of his own name, and bequeaths his property to a stranger,
there is no reason to limit the signiﬁcation of the terms; they should be
taken in their full import, it being probable that the testator used them
in that sense.
The contractingpartiesareobligedtoexpressthemselvesinsuchman-
ner that they may mutually understand each other. This is evident from
the very nature of the transaction. Those who form the contract,concur
in the same intentions; they agree in desiring the same thing; and how
shall they agree in this instance, if they do not perfectly understandeach
other? Without this, their contract will be no better than a mockery or
a snare. If thentheyoughttospeakinsuchamannerastobeunderstood,
it is necessary that they should employ the words in their proper signi-
ﬁcation,—the signiﬁcation which common usage has afﬁxedtothem,—
and that they annex an established meaning to every term, every ex-
pression, they make use of. They mustnot, designedlyandwithoutmen-
tioning it, deviate from the common usage and the appropriatemeaning
of words: and it is presumed that they have conformed to established
custom in this particular, as long as no cogent reasons can be adduced
to authorise a presumption to the contrary; for the presumption is, in
general, that things have been done as they ought. From all these in-
contestable truths, results this rule: In the interpretation of treaties, com-
pacts, and promises, we ought not to deviate from the common use of the
language, unless we have very strong reasons for it. In all human affairs,
§271. The
terms are to
be explained
conformably
to common
usage.


chapter xvii
413
where absolute certainty is not at hand to point out the way, we must
take probability for our guide. In most cases, it is extremely probable
thatthepartieshaveexpressedthemselvesconformablytotheestablished
usage: and such probability ever affords a strong presumption, which
cannot be over-ruled but by a still stronger presumption to the contrary.
Camden* gives us a treaty, in which it is expressly said that the treaty
shall be precisely understood according to the force and appropriate sig-
niﬁcation of the terms. After such a clause, we cannot, under any pre-
tence, deviate from the proper meaning which custom has afﬁxed to the
terms,—the will of the contracting parties being thereby formally de-
clared in the most unambiguous manner.
The usage we here speak of, is that of the time when the treaty, or the
deed, of whatever kind, was drawn up and concluded. Languages in-
cessantly vary, and the signiﬁcation and force of words changes with
time. When, therefore, an ancient deed is to be interpreted, we should
be acquainted with the com-<249>mon use of the terms at the time
when it was written; and that knowledge is to be acquired from deeds
of the same period, and from contemporary writers, by diligently com-
paring them witheachother. Thisistheonlysourcefromwhichtoderive
any information that can be depended on. The use of the vulgar lan-
guages being, as every one knows, very arbitrary,—etymological and
grammatical investigations, pursued with a view to discover the true im-
port of a word in common usage, would furnish but a vain theory,
equally useless and destitute of proof.
Words are only designed to express the thoughts; thus the true sig-
niﬁcation of an expression, in common use, is the idea which custom
has afﬁxed tothatexpression. Itisthenagrossquibbletoafﬁxaparticular
sense to a word, in order to elude the true sense of the entire expression.
Mahomet,70 emperor of the Turks, at the taking of Negropont,71having
promised a man to spare his head, caused him to be cut in two through
the middle of the body. Tamerlane, after having engaged the city of
* History of Queen Elizabeth.
70. Muhammad II, sultan of the Ottoman Empire, r. 1451–81.
71. Negropont, an island in the Aegean Sea, was conquered by the Turks in 1470.
§272. Inter-
pretation of
ancient
treaties.
§273. Of
quibbles on
words.

414
Sect. 268. Fifth general maxim—the interpretation
ought to be made according to certain rules,
page 246
269. The faith of treaties imposes an obligation to
follow those rules,
247
270. General rule of interpretation,
247
271. The terms are to be explained conformably to
common usage,
248
272. Interpretation of ancient treaties,
248
273. Quibbles on words,
249
274. A rule on that subject,
249
275. Mental reservations,
249
276. Interpretation of technical terms,
249
277. Terms whose signiﬁcation admits of degrees,
250
278. Figurative expressions, <xl>
250
279. Equivocal expressions,
250
280. The rule for these two cases,
251
281. Not necessary to give a term the same sense
every-where in the same deed,
252
282. We ought to reject every interpretation which leads
to an absurdity,
252
283. or which renders the act null and void of effect,
253
284. Obscure expressions interpreted by others more
clear in the same author,
254
285. Interpretation founded on the connection of
the discourse,
254
286. Interpretation drawn from the connection and
relation of the things themselves,
255
287. Interpretation founded on the reason of
the deed,
256
288. Where many reasons have concurred to
determine the will,
256
289. What constitutes a sufﬁcient reason for an act
of the will,
257
290. Extensive interpretation founded on the reason
of the act,
257
291. Frauds tending to elude laws or promises,
258
292. Restrictive interpretation,
259
293. Its use, in order to avoid falling into absurdities,
or into what is unlawful,
259
294. or what is too severe and burthensome,
260
295. How it ought to restrict the signiﬁcation agreeably
to the subject,
260


46
original contents
Sect. 296. How a change happening in the state of
things may form an exception,
page 260
297. Interpretation of a deed in unforeseen cases,
262
298. Reasons arising from the possibility and not the
existence of a thing,
262
299. Expressions susceptible of an extensive and a
limited sense,
263
300. Things favourable, and things odious,
263
301. What tends to the common advantage, and to
equality, is favourable: the contrary is odious,
264
302. What is useful to human society, is favourable: the
contrary is odious,
265
303. Whatever contains a penalty, is odious,
265
304. Whatever renders a deed void, is odious,
265
305. Whatever tends to change the present state of
things, is odious: the contrary is favourable,
265
306. Things of a mixed nature,
266
307. Interpretation of favourable things,
266
308. Interpretation of odious things,
267
309. Examples,
268
310. How we ought to interpret deeds of pure liberality,
270
311. Collision of laws or treaties,
271
312. First rule in cases of collision,
271
313. Second rule,
271
314. Third rule,
271
315. Fourth rule,
272
316. Fifth rule,
272
317. Sixth rule,
273
318. Seventh rule,
273
319. Eighth rule, <xli>
274
320. Ninth rule,
274
321. Tenth rule,
274
322. General remark on the manner of observing all the
preceding rules,
274
chapter xviii
Of the Mode of terminating Disputes
between Nations.
323. General direction on this subject,
274
324. Every nation is bound to give satisfaction
respecting the just complaints of another,
275


original contents
47
Sect. 325. How nations may abandon their rights and
just complaints,
page 275
326. Means suggested by the law of nature, for
terminating their disputes:—amicable
accommodation,
276
327. Compromise,
276
328. Mediation,
276
329. Arbitration,
277
330. Conferences and congresses,
278
331. Distinction to be made between evident and
doubtful cases,
278
332. Essential rights, and those of less importance,
279
333. How we acquire a right of recurring to force in a
doubtful case,
280
334. and even without attempting other measures,
280
335. Voluntary law of nations on that subject,
280
336. Equitable conditions to be offered,
281
337. Possessor’s right in doubtful cases,
282
338. How reparation of an injury is to be sought,
282
339. Retaliation,
282
340. Various modes of punishing, without having
recourse to arms,
283
341. Retortion,
283
342. Reprisals,
283
343. What is required to render them lawful,
284
344. Upon what effects reprisals are made,
284
345. The state is bound to compensate those who suffer
by reprisals,
285
346. The sovereign alone can order reprisals,
285
347. Reprisals against a nation for actions of her
subjects, and in favour of the injured subjects,
285
348. but not in favour of foreigners,
285
349. Those who have given cause for reprisals are
bound to indemnify those who suffer by them,
286
350. What may be deemed a refusal to do justice,
287
351. Subjects arrested by way of reprisals,
287
352. Our right against those who oppose reprisals,
288
353. Just reprisals do not afford a just cause for war,
288
354. How we ought to conﬁne ourselves to reprisals, or
at length proceed to hostilities, <xlii>
288

48
original contents
book ii: nations in relation to other states
Sebastia to capitulate72 under his promise of shedding no blood, caused
all the soldiers of the garrison to be buried alive:* gross subterfuges
which, as Cicero remarks,† only serve to aggravate the guilt of the per-
ﬁdious wretch who has recourse to them. To spare the head of any one,
and to shed no blood, are expressions, which, according to common cus-
tom, and especially on such an occasion, manifestly imply to spare the
lives of the parties.
All these pitiful subtilties are overthrown by this unerring rule: When
we evidently see what is the sense that agrees with the intention of the con-
tracting parties, it is not allowable to wrest their words to a contrary mean-
ing. The intention, sufﬁciently known, furnishes the true matter of the
convention,—what is promised and accepted, demanded and granted.
A violation of the treaty is rather a deviation from the intention which
it sufﬁciently manifests, than from the terms in which it is worded: for
the terms are nothing without the intention by which they must be
dictated.
Is it necessary, in an enlightened age, to say that mental reservations
cannot be admitted in treaties? This is manifest, since, by the verynature
of the treaty, the parties are bound to express themselves in such manner
that they may mutually understand each other (§271). There is scarcely
an individual now to be found, who would not be ashamed of building
upon a mental reservation. Whatcanbetheuseof suchanartiﬁce,unless
to lull the opposite party into a false security, under the vain appearance
of a contract? It is then a real piece of knavery.
Technicalterms, or termspeculiartotheartsandsciences,oughtcom-
monly to be interpreted according to the deﬁnition given of them by
masters of the art, or persons versed in the <250> knowledge of the art
or science to which the terms belong. I say commonly; for this rule is not
so absolute, but that we may and even ought to deviate from it, when
* See Puffendorf’s Law of Nature and Nations, book v. chap xii. §3.—La Croix,
in his Hist. of Timurbec, book v. ch. xv. speaks of this cruelty of Timurbec or Tamer-
lane towards 4,000 Armenian horsemen, but says nothing of theperﬁdywhichothers
attribute to him.
† Fraus enim adstringit, non dissolvit perjurium. De Ofﬁc. lib. iii. cap. xxxii.
72. In 1400.
§274. A rule
on this subject.
§275. Mental
reservations.
§276. Inter-
pretation of
technical
terms.


chapter xvii
415
we have good reasons for such deviation; as, for instance, if it were
proved that he who speaks in a treaty, or in any other deed, did not
understand the art or science from which he borrowed the term,—that
he was unacquainted with its import as a technical word,—that he em-
ployed it in a vulgar acceptation, &c.
If, however, the technical or other terms relate to things that admit
of different degrees, we ought not scrupulously to adhere to deﬁnitions,
but rather to take the terms in a sense agreeable to the context: for, a
regular deﬁnition describes a thing in its most perfect state; and yet it is
certain that we do not always mean it in that state of its utmost perfec-
tion, whenever we speak of it. Now the interpretation should only tend
to the discovery of the will of the contracting parties (§268): to each
term, therefore, we should afﬁx that meaning, which the party whose
words we interpret, probably hadincontemplation.Thus,whenthepar-
ties in a treaty have agreed to submit their pretensions to the decision
of two or three able civilians, it would be ridiculous to endeavour to
elude the compromise, under the pretence that we can ﬁnd no civilian
accomplished in every point, or to strain the terms so far as to reject all
who do not equal Cujas73 or Grotius. Would he who had stipulated for
the assistance of tenthousand good troopshaveanyreasontoinsistupon
soldiers of whom the very worst should be comparable to the veterans
of Julius Caesar? And if a prince had promised his ally a good general,
must he send him none but a Marlborough or a Turenne?
There are ﬁgurative expressions that are become so familiar in the
common use of language, that, in numberless instances, they supply the
place of proper terms, so that we ought to take them ina ﬁgurativesense,
without paying any attention to their original, proper, and direct sig-
niﬁcation: the subject of the discourse sufﬁciently indicatesthemeaning
that should be afﬁxed to them. To hatch a plot, to carry ﬁre and sword
into a country,* are expressions of this sort; and there scarcely can occur
* The French expression, “ourdir une trame,” which is here rendered “hatch aplot,”
literally signiﬁes “to lay the warp of a web”;—“ﬁre and sword,” literally, “ﬁre and steel”
(or iron). [[Note added in 1797 edition.]]
73. Jacques Cujas, 1520–90, French jurist, professor at Toulouse, and counsellor
to the Parlement of Grenoble.
§277. Of
terms whose
signiﬁcation
admits of
degrees.
§278. Of
ﬁgurative
expressions.


416
book ii: nations in relation to other states
an instance where it would not be absurd to take them in their direct
and literal sense.
There is not perhaps any language that does not also contain words
which signify two or more different things, and phrases which are sus-
ceptible of more than one sense. Thence arises ambiguity in discourse.
The contracting parties ought carefully to avoid it. Designedly to use it
with a view to elude their engagements in the sequel, is downright per-
ﬁdy, since the faith of treaties obliges the contracting parties to express
their intentions clearly (§271). But if an ambiguous expressionhasfound
its <251> way into a deed, it is the part of the interpreter to clear up any
doubt thereby occasioned.
The following is the rule that ought to direct the interpretationinthis
as well as in the preceding case: We ought always to afﬁx such meaning to
the expressions, as is most suitable to the subject or matter in question. For,
by a true interpretation, we endeavour to discover the thoughts of the
persons speaking, or of the contracting parties in a treaty. Now it ought
to be presumed that he who has employed a word which is susceptible
of many different signiﬁcations, has taken it in that which agrees with
his subject. In proportion as he employs his attention on the matter in
question, the terms proper to express his thoughts present themselves to
his mind; this equivocal word could therefore only present itself in the
sense proper to express the thought of him who makes use of it, that is,
in the sense agreeable to the subject. It would be a feeble objection to
this, to allege that a man sometimes designedly employs equivocal ex-
pressions, with a view of holding out ideas quite different from his real
thoughts, and that, in such case, the sense which agrees with the subject
is not that which corresponds with the intention of the personspeaking.
We have already observed, that whenever a man can and ought to make
known his intention, we assume for true against him what he has suf-
ﬁciently declared (§266). And as good-faith ought to preside in conven-
tions, they are always interpreted on the supposition that it actually did
preside in them. Let us illustrate this rule by examples. The word day is
understood of the natural day, or the time during which the sun affords
us his light, and of the civil day, or thespace of twenty-fourhours.When
it is used in a convention to point out a space of time, the subject itself
§279. Of
equivocal
expressions.
§280. The rule
for these two
cases.


chapter xvii
417
manifestly shews that the parties mean the civil day, or the term of
twenty-four hours. It was therefore a pitiful subterfuge, or rather a no-
torious perﬁdy, in Cleomenes,74 when, havingconcludedatruceof some
days with thepeopleof Argos,andﬁndingthemasleeponthethirdnight
in reliance on the faith of the treaty, he killed a part of their number,
and made the rest prisoners, alleging that the nights were not compre-
hended in the truce.* The word steel may be understood of the metal
itself, or of certain instruments made of it:—in aconventionwhichstip-
ulates that the enemy shall lay down their steel, it evidently means their
weapons: wherefore Pericles, in the example related above (§233), gave a
fraudulent interpretation to those words, since it was contrary to what
the nature of the subject manifestly pointed out. Q. Fabius Labeo, of
whom we made mention in the same section, shewed equal dishonesty
in the interpretation of his treaty with Antiochus; for a sovereign who
stipulates that the half of his ﬂeet or of his vessels shall be restored to
him, undoubtedly means that the other party shall restore to him vessels
which he can make use of, and not the half <252> of each vessel, when
sawed into two. Pericles and Fabius are also condemned by the rule es-
tablished above (§274), which forbids us to wrest the sense of the words
contrary to the evident intention of the contracting parties.
If any one of those expressions which are susceptible of different signiﬁ-
cations occurs more than once in the same piece, we cannot make it a rule
to take it every-where in the same signiﬁcation. For we must, conformably
to the preceding rule, take such expression, in each article, according as
the subject requires,—pro substrata materia,75 as the masters of the art
say. The word day, for instance, has two signiﬁcations, as we have just
observed (§280). If therefore it be said in a convention, that there shall
be a truce of ﬁfty days, on condition that commissioners from both par-
ties shall, during eight successive days, jointly endeavour to adjust the
dispute,—the ﬁfty days of the truce are civil days of twenty-four hours;
but it would be absurd to understand them in the same sense in the
* Puffendorf [[Of the Law of Nature and Nations]], lib. v. cap. xii. §7.
74. Cleomenes, king of Sparta, died ca. 490 b.c.
75. “According to the relevant subject.”
§281. Not
necessary to
give a term the
same sense
everywhere in
the same deed.


418
book ii: nations in relation to other states
second article, and to pretend that the commissioners should labour
eight days and nights without intermission.
Every interpretation that leads to an absurdity, ought to be rejected; or,
in other words, we should not give to any piece a meaning from which
any absurd consequences would follow, but must interpret it in such a
manner as to avoid absurdity. As it is not to be presumed that any one
means what is absurd, it cannot be supposed that the person speaking
intended that his words should be understood in a manner from which
an absurdity would follow. Neither is it allowable to presume that he
meant to indulge a sportive levity in a serious deed: for what is shameful
and unlawful is not to be presumed. We call absurd not only what is
physically impossible, but what is morally so,—that is to say, what is so
contrary to reason, that it cannot be attributed to a man in his right
senses. Those fanatic Jews, who scrupled to defend themselves when the
enemy attacked them on the sabbath day, gave an absurd interpretation
to the fourth commandment. Why did they not also abstain from dress-
ing, walking, and eating? These also are “works,” if the term be strained
to its utmost rigour. It is said that a man in England married threewives,
in order that he might not be subject to the penalty of the law which
forbids marrying two. This is doubtless a popular tale, invented with a
view to ridicule the extreme circumspection of the English, who willnot
allow the smallest departure from the letter in the application of thelaw.
That wise and free people have too often seen, by the experienceof other
nations, that the laws are no longer a ﬁrm barrier and secure defence,
when once the executive power is allowed to interpret them at pleasure.
But surely they do not mean that the letter of the law should on any
occasion be strained to a sense that is manifestly absurd.
The rule we have just mentioned is absolutely necessary, and ought
to be followed, even when the text of the law or treaty <253> does not,
considered in itself, present either obscurity or ambiguity in the lan-
guage. For it must be observed, that the uncertainty of the sense we are
to give to a law or a treaty, does not solely proceed from the obscurity
or other defect in the expression, but also from the limited nature of the
human mind, which cannot foresee all cases and circumstances, nortake
in at one view all the consequences of what is decreed or promised,—
§282. We
ought to reject
every interpre-
tation that
leads to an
absurdity;


chapter xvii
419
and, ﬁnally, from the impossibility of entering into that immensedetail.
Laws and treaties can only be worded in a general manner; and it is the
interpreter’s province to apply them to particular cases, conformably to
the intention of the legislature, or of the contracting powers. Now we
are not in any case to presume that it was their intention to establish an
absurdity: and therefore, when their expressions, taken in their proper
and ordinary meaning, would lead to absurd consequences, it becomes
necessary to deviate from that meaning, just so far as is sufﬁcienttoavoid
absurdity. Let us suppose a captain has received orders to advance in a
right line with his troops to a certain post: he ﬁnds a precipice in his way:
surely his orders do not oblige him to leap headlong down: he must
therefore deviate from the right line, so far as is necessary to avoid the
precipice, but no farther.
The application of the rule is more easy, when the expressions of the
law, or of the treaty, are susceptible of two different meanings. In this
case we adopt without hesitation that meaning from which no absurdity
follows. In the same manner, when the expression is such, that we may
give it a ﬁgurative sense, we ought doubtless to do this, when it becomes
necessary, in order to avoid falling into an absurdity.
It is not to be presumed that sensible persons, in treating together, or
transacting any other serious business, meant that the result of theirpro-
ceedings should prove a mere nullity. Theinterpretation, therefore,which
would render a treaty null and inefﬁcient, cannot be admitted. We may
considerthisruleasabranchof thepreceding;foritisakindof absurdity
to suppose that the very terms of a deed should reduce it to mean noth-
ing. It ought to be interpreted in such a manner, as that it may have its effect,
and not prove vain and nugatory: and in this interpretation we proceed
according to the mode pointed out in the foregoing section. In both
cases, as in all interpretations, the question is, to givethewordsthatsense
which ought to be presumed most conformable to the intention of the
parties speaking. If many different interpretations present themselves,
by which we can conveniently avoid construing the deed into a nullity
or an absurdity, we are to prefer that which appears the most agreeable
to the intention of those who framed the deed: the particular circum-
stances of the case, aided by other rules of interpretation, will serve to
§283. and that
which renders
the act null
and void of
effect.

420
book ii: nations in relation to other states
point it out. Thucydides relates,* that the Athe-<254>nians,afterhaving
promised to retire from the territories of the Boeotians, claimed a right
to remain in the country under pretence that the lands actuallyoccupied
by their army did not belong to the Boeotians;—a ridiculous quibble,
since, by giving that sense to the treaty, they reduced it to nothing, or
rather to a puerile play. The territories of the Boeotians should evidently
have been construed to mean all that was comprised within their former
boundaries, without excepting what the enemy had seized during the
war.
If he who has expressed himself in an obscure or equivocal manner
has spoken elsewhere more clearly on the same subject, he is the best
interpreter of his own words. We ought to interpret his obscureorequivocal
expressions in such a manner, that they may agree with those clear and un-
equivocal terms which he has elsewhere used, either in the same deed, or on
some other similar occasion. In fact, while we have no proof that a man
has changed his mind or manner of thinking, it is presumed that his
thoughts have been the same on similar occasions; so that if he has any-
where clearly shewn his intention with respect to a certain thing, we
ought to afﬁx the same meaning to what he has elsewhere obscurely said
on the same subject. Let us suppose, for instance, that two allies have
reciprocally promised each other, in case of necessity, the assistance of
ten thousand foot-soldiers who are to be supported at the expense of the
party that sends them, and that, by a posterior treaty, they agree that the
number of the auxiliary troops shall be ﬁfteen thousand, without men-
tioning their support: the obscurity or uncertainty which remains inthis
article of the new treaty, is dissipated by the clear and expressstipulation
contained in the former one. As the allies do not give any indicationthat
they have changed their minds with respect to the support of the aux-
iliary troops, we are not to presume any such change; and those ﬁfteen
thousand men are to be supported as the ten thousand promised in the
ﬁrst treaty. The same holds good, and with much stronger reason, when
there is question of two articles of the same treaty,—when, for example,
a prince promises to furnish ten thousand men, paid and maintained at
* [[History of the Peloponnesian War,]] Lib. iv. cap. xcviii.
§284. Obscure
expressions
interpreted by
others more
clear in the
same author.


chapter xvii
421
his own expense, for the defence of the states of his ally,—and, in an-
other article, only promises four thousand men, in case that ally be en-
gaged in an offensive war.
It frequently happens, that, with a view to conciseness, peopleexpress
imperfectly, and with some degree of obscurity, things which they sup-
pose to be sufﬁciently elucidated by the preceding matter, or which they
intend to explain in the sequel: and moreover, words and expressions
have a different force, sometimes even a quite different signiﬁcation,ac-
cording to the occasion, their connection, and their relation to other
words. The connection and train of the discourse is therefore another
source of interpretation. We must consider the whole discourse together, in
order perfectly to conceive the sense of it, and to give to each expression, not
so much the signiﬁcation which it may individually ad-<255>mit of, as that
which it ought to have from the context and spirit of the discourse. Such is
the maxim of the Roman law, Incivile est, nisi totaˆ lege perspectaˆ, unaˆ
aliquaˆ particulaˆ ejus propositaˆ, judicare, vel respondere.*76
The very connection and relation of the things in question helps also
to discover and establish the true sense of a treaty, or of any other piece.
The interpretation ought to be made in such a manner, that all the parts
may appear consonant to each other,—that what follows may agree with
what preceded,—unless it evidently appear, that, by the subsequent clauses,
the parties intended to make some alteration in the preceding ones. For it is
to be presumed that the authors of a deed had an uniform and steady
train of thinking,—that they did not aim at inconsistencies and con-
tradictions,—but rather that they intended to explain one thing by an-
other,—and, in a word, that one and the same spirit reigns throughout
the same production or the same treaty. Let us render this more plain by
an example. A treaty of alliance declares, that, in case one of the allies
be attacked, each of the others shall assist him with a body of ten thou-
sand foot, paid and supported; and in another article, it is said that the
ally who is attacked shall be at liberty to demand the promisedassistance
* Digest [[of Justinian]]. Lib. i. tit. iii. De Legibus, leg. 24.
76. “It is impertinent to give an opinion or make a response on any detail put
forward without examining the whole law” (trans. Eds.).
§285. Inter-
pretation
founded on
the connection
of the discourse.
§286. Inter-
pretation
drawn from
the connection
and relation
of the things
themselves,


422
book ii: nations in relation to other states
in cavalry rather than in infantry. Here we see, that, in the ﬁrst article,
the allies have determined the quantum of the succour, and its value,—
that of ten thousand foot; and, in the latter article, without appearing
to intend any variation in the value or number, they leave the nature of
the succours to the choice of the party who may stand in need of them.
If therefore the ally who is attacked calls upon the others forcavalry,they
will give him, according to the established proportion, an equivalent to
ten thousand foot. But if it appears that the intention of the latterarticle
was, that the promised succours should in certaincasesbeaugmented,—
if, for instance, it be said, that, in case one of the allies happen to be
attacked by an enemy of considerably superior strength, and more pow-
erful in cavalry, the succours shall be furnished in cavalry, and not in
infantry,—it appears that, in this case, the promised assistance ought to
be ten thousand horse.
As two articles in one and the same treaty may bear relation to each
other, two different treaties may in like manner have a relative connec-
tion; and in this case, each serves to explain the other. For instance, one
of the contracting parties has, in considerationof acertainobject,prom-
ised to deliver to the other ten thousand sacks of wheat. By a subsequent
agreement, it is determined, that, instead of wheat, he shall give him
oats. The quantity of oats is not expressed; but it is determined by com-
paring the second convention with the ﬁrst. If there be no circumstance
to prove that it was the intention of the parties, in thesecondagreement,
to diminish the value of what was to be delivered, we are to understand
a quantity of oats proportioned to the price <256> of ten thousand
sacks of wheat: but if it evidently appears, from the circumstances and
motives of the second convention, that it was their intention to reduce
the value of what was due under the former agreement,—in this case,
ten thousand sacks of oats are to be substituted in lieu of the ten thou-
sand sacks of wheat.
The reason of the law, or of the treaty,—that is to say, the motivewhich
led to the making of it, and the object in contemplation at the time,—
is the most certain clue to lead us to the discovery of its true meaning;
and great attention should be paid to this circumstance, whenever there
is question either of explaining an obscure, ambiguous, indeterminate
§287. Inter-
pretation
founded on
the reason of
the deed.


chapter xvii
423
passage in a law or treaty, or of applying it to a particular case. When
once we certainly know the reason which alone has determined the will of
the person speaking, we ought to interpret and apply his words in a manner
suitable to that reason alone. Otherwise he will be made to speak and act
contrary to his intention, and in opposition to his own views. Pursuant
to this rule, a prince, who, on granting his daughter in marriage, has
promised to assist his intended son-in-law in all his wars, is not bound
to give him any assistance if the marriage does not take place.
But we ought to be very certain that we know the true and onlyreason
of the law, the promise, or the treaty. In matters of this nature, it is not
allowable to indulge in vague and uncertain conjectures, and to suppose
reasons and views where there are none certainly known. If the piece in
question is in itself obscure,—if, in order to discover its meaning, we
have no other resource than the investigation of the author’s views, or
the motives of the deed,—we may thenhaverecoursetoconjecture,and,
in default of absolute certainty, adopt, as the true meaning, that which
has the greatest degree of probability on its side. But it is a dangerous
abuse, to go, without necessity, in search of motivesanduncertainviews,
in order to wrest, restrict, or extend the meaning of a deed which is of
itself sufﬁciently clear, and carries no absurdity on the face of it. Such
a procedure is a violation of that incontestable maxim,—that it is not
allowable to interpret what has no need of interpretation (§263). Much
less are we allowed,—when the author of a piece has in the piece itself
declared his reasons and motives,—to attribute to him some secret rea-
son, which may authorise us in giving an interpretation repugnant to
the natural meaning of the expressions. Even though he should have
entertained the views which we attribute to him,—yet, if he has con-
cealed them, and announced different ones, it is upon the latter alone
that we must build our interpretation, and not upon those which the
author has not expressed:—we assume, as true, against him, what he has
sufﬁciently declared (§266).
We ought to be the more circumspect in this kind of interpretation,
as it frequently happens that several motives concur to determine the
will of the party who speaks in a law or a promise. Perhapsthecombined
inﬂuence of all those motives was necessary <257> in order todetermine
§288. Where
many reasons
have concurred
to determine
the will.


424
book ii: nations in relation to other states
his will;—perhaps each one of them, taken individually, would have
been sufﬁcient to produce that effect. In the former case, if we are per-
fectly certain that it was only in consideration of several concurrent reasons
and motives that the legislature or the contracting parties consented to the
law or the contract, the interpretation and application ought to be made in
a manner agreeable to all those concurrent reasons, and none of themmust
be overlooked. But in the latter case, when it is evident that each of the
reasons which have concurred in determining the will, was sufﬁcient to pro-
duce that effect, so that the author of the piece in question would, by each
of the reasons separately considered, have been induced to form the same
determination which he has formed upon all the reasons taken in the ag-
gregate, his words must be so interpreted and applied, as to make themaccord
with each of those reasons taken individually. Suppose a prince has prom-
ised certain advantages to all foreign protestants and artisans who will
come and settle in his states: if that prince is in no want of subjects, but
of artisans only,—and if, on the other hand, it appears that he does not
choose to have any other subjects than protestants,—his promise must
be so interpreted, as to relate only to such foreigners as unite those two
characters, of protestants and artisans. But if it is evident thatthisprince
wants to people his country, and that, although he would prefer protes-
tant subjects to others, he has in particular so great a want of artisans,
that he would gladly receive them, of whatever religion they be,—his
words should be taken in a disjunctive sense, so that it will be sufﬁcient
to be either a protestant or an artisan, in order to enjoy the promised
advantages.
To avoid tedious and complex circumlocution, we shall make use of
the term, “sufﬁcient reason for an act of the will,” to express whatever
has produced that act,—whateverhas determinedthewillonaparticular
occasion; whether the will has been determined by a single reason, or by
many concurrent reasons. That sufﬁcient reason, then, will be sometimes
found to consist in a combination of many different reasons, so that,
where a single one of those reasons is wanting, the sufﬁcient reason no
longer exists: and in those cases where we say that many motives, many
reasons, have concurred to determine the will, yet so as that each in par-
ticular would have been alone capable of producing the same effect,—
§289. What
constitutes a
sufﬁcient
reason for an
act of the will.


chapter xvii
425
there will then be many sufﬁcient reasons for producing one single act of
the will. Of this we see daily instances. A prince, for example, declares
war for three or four injuries received, each of which would have been
sufﬁcient to have produced the declaration of war.
The consideration of the reason of a law or promise not only serves
to explain the obscure or ambiguous expressions which occur in the
piece, but also to extend or restrict its several provisions independently
of the expressions, and in conformity to the intention and views of the
legislature or the contracting parties, rather than to their words. For,
according to the remark of <258> Cicero,* the language, invented to
explain the will, ought not to hinder its effect. When the sufﬁcient and
only reason of a provision, either in a law or a promise, is perfectly certain,
and well understood, we extend that provision to cases to which the same
reason is applicable, although they be not comprised within the signiﬁcation
of the terms. This is what is called extensive interpretation. Itiscommonly
said, that we ought to adhere rather to the spirit than to the letter. Thus the
Mahomedans justly extend the prohibition of wine, in the Koran, to all
intoxicating liquors; that dangerous quality being the only reason that
could induce their legislator to prohibit the use of wine. Thus also, if,
at the time when there were no other fortiﬁcations than walls, it was
agreed not to inclose a certain town with walls, it would not be allowable
to fortify it with fosse´s and ramparts, since the only view of the treaty
evidently was, to prevent its being converted into a fortiﬁed place.
But we should here observe the same caution above recommended
(§287), and even still greater, since the question relates to an application
in no wise authorised by the terms of the deed. We ought to be thor-
oughly convinced that we know the true and only reason of the law or
* Quid? verbis satis hoc cautum erat? Minime. Quae res igitur valuit? Voluntas:
quae si, tacitis nobis, intelligi posset, verbis omnino non uteremur. Quia non potest,
verba reperta sunt, non quae impedirent, sed quae indicarent voluntatem. [[“Well,
did the wording of the will provide adequately for this situation? Far from it. Then
what was the deciding consideration? Intention; for if our intention could be made
clear without speaking, we should not use words at all; but because it cannot, words
have been invented, not to conceal but to reveal intention.”]] Cicer. Orat. pro
Caecina [[53]].
§290. Exten-
sive interpreta-
tion founded
on the reason
of the act.

426
book ii: nations in relation to other states
the promise, and that the author has taken it in the same latitude which
must be given to it in order to make it reach the case to which we mean
to extend the law or promise in question. As to the rest, I do not here
forget what I have said above (§268), that the true sense of a promise is
not only that which the person promising had in his mind, but also that
which has been sufﬁciently declared,—that which both the contracting
parties must reasonably have understood. In like manner, thetruereason
of a promise is that which the contract, the nature of the things in ques-
tion, and other circumstances, sufﬁciently indicate: it would be useless
and ridiculous to allege any by-views which the person might have se-
cretly entertained in his own mind.
The rule just laid down serves also to defeat the pretexts and pitiful
evasions of those who endeavour to elude laws or treaties. Good-faith
adheres to the intention; fraud insists on the terms, when it thinks that
they can furnish a cloak for its prevarications. The isle of Pharos near
Alexandria was, with other islands, tributary to the Rhodians. The latter
having sent collectors to levy the tribute, the queen of Egypt amused
them for some time at her court, using in the mean while every possible
exertion to join Pharos to the main land by means of moles: after which
she laughed at the Rhodians, and sent them a message intimating that
it was very unreasonable in them to pretend to levy on the main land a
tribute which they had no title to demand except from the islands.*
There existed a law <259> which forbade the Corinthians to give vessels
to the Athenians:—they sold them a number at ﬁve drachmae each.†
The following was an expedient worthy of Tiberius:77 custom not per-
mitting him to cause a virgin to be strangled, he ordered the executioner
ﬁrst to deﬂower the young daughter of Sejanus,78 and then to strangle
* Puffendorf [[Of the Law of Nature and Nations]], lib. v. cap. xii. §18. He quotes
Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. xxii. cap. xvi.
† Puffend. ibid.—Herodotus, lib. vi.—Five drachmae amounted to little more
than three shillings sterling.
77. Tiberius, emperor of Rome, r. a.d. 14–37.
78. Lucius Aelius Sejanus (20 b.c.–a.d. 31), appointed praetorian prefect by
Tiberius.
§291. Frauds
tending to
elude laws or
promises.
chapter xvii
427
her.* To violate the spirit of the law whilewepretendtorespecttheletter,
is a fraud no less criminal than an open violation of it; it is equally re-
pugnant to the intention of the law-maker, and only evinces a more
artful and deliberate villany in the person who is guilty of it.
Restrictive interpretation, which is the reverse of extensive interpreta-
tion, is founded on the same principle. As we extend a clause to those
cases, which, though not comprised within the meaning of the terms,
are nevertheless comprised in the intention of that clause, and included
in the reasons that produced it,—in like manner, we restrict a law or a
promise, contrary to the literal signiﬁcation of the terms,—our judg-
ment being directed by the reason of that law or that promise: that is to
say, if a case occurs, to which the well-known reason of a law or promise is
utterly inapplicable, that case ought to be excepted, although, if we were
barely to consider the meaning of the terms, it should seem to fall within the
purview of the law or promise. It is impossible to think of every thing,
to foresee every thing, and to express every thing; it is sufﬁcient to
enounce certain things in such a manner as to make known ourthoughts
concerning things of which we do not speak: and, as Seneca the rhet-
oriciansays,†thereareexceptionssoclear,thatitisunnecessarytoexpress
them. The law condemns to suffer death whoever strikes his father:shall
we punish him who has shaken and struck his father, to recover him
from a lethargic stupor? shall we punish a young child, or a man in a
delirium, who has lifted his hand against the author of his life? In the
former case the reason of the law does not hold good; and to the two
latter it is inapplicable. We are bound to restore what is intrusted to us:
shall I restore what a robber has intrusted to me, at the time when the
true proprietor makes himself known to me, and demands his property?
A man has left his sword with me: shall I restore it to him, when, in a
transport of fury, he demands it for the purpose of killing an innocent
person?
* Tacit. Annal. lib. v. 9.
† [[Seneca, De beneﬁciis]] Lib. iv. Declam. xxvii.
§292. Re-
strictive
interpretation.


428
book ii: nations in relation to other states
We have recourse to restrictive interpretation, in ordertoavoidfalling
into absurdities (see §282). A man bequeaths his house to one, and to
another his garden, the only entrance into which is through the house.
It would be absurd to suppose that he had bequeathed to the latter a
garden into which he could not enter: we must therefore restrictthepure
and simple donation of the house, and understand that it was givenonly
upon condition of allowing a passage to the gar-<260>den. The same
mode of interpretation is to be adopted whenever a case occurs,inwhich
the law or the treaty, if interpreted according to the strict meaning of
the terms, would lead to something unlawful. On such an occasion, the
case in question is to be excepted, since nobody can ordain or promise
what is unlawful. For this reason, though assistance has been promised
to an ally in all his wars, no assistance ought to be given him when he
undertakes one that is manifestly unjust.
When a case arises in which it would be too severe and too prejudicial
to any one to interpret a law or a promise according to the rigour of the
terms, a restrictive interpretation is then also used, and we except the
case in question, agreeably to the intention of the legislature, or of him
who made the promise: for the legislature intends only what is just and
equitable; and, in contracts, no one can enter into such engagements in
favour of another, as shall essentially supersede the duty he owes to him-
self. It is then presumed with reason, that neither the legislature nor the
contracting parties have intended to extend their regulations to cases of
this nature, and that they themselves, if personallypresent,wouldexcept
them. A prince is no longer obliged to send succours to his allies, when
he himself is attacked, and has need of all his forces for his own defence.
He may also, without the slightest imputation of perﬁdy, abandon an
alliance, when, through the ill success of the war, he sees his state threat-
ened with impending ruin if he does not immediately treat with the
enemy. Thus, towards the end of the last century, Victor Amadeus,duke
of Savoy,79 found himself under the necessity of separating from his
allies, and of receiving law from France, to avoid losing his states. The
79. Victor Amadeus II, duke of Savoy, r. 1675–1720.
§293. Its use,
in order to
avoid falling
into absurdi-
ties, or into
what is
unlawful;
§294. or what
is too severe
and burthen-
some.


chapter xvii
429
king his son80 would have had good reasons to justify a separate peace
in the year 1745: but upheld by his courage, and animated by just views
of his true interest, he embraced the generous resolution to struggle
against an extremity which might have dispensed with his persisting in
his engagements.
We have said above (§280), that we should take the expressions in the
sense that agrees with the subject or the matter.Restrictiveinterpretation
is also directed by this rule. If the subject or the matter treated of will not
allow that the terms of a clause should be taken in their full extent,weshould
limit the sense according as the subject requires. Let us suppose that the
custom of a particular country conﬁnes the entail of ﬁefs to the male
line properly so called: if an act of enfeoffment in that country declares
that the ﬁef is given to a person for himself and his male descendents,
the sense of these last words must be restricted to the males descending
from males; for the subject will not admit of our understanding them
also of males who are the issue of females, though they are reckoned
among the male descendents of the ﬁrst possessor.
The following question has been proposed and debated,—“Whether
promises include a tacit condition of the state of af-<261>fairs contin-
uing the same,—or whether a change happening in the state of affairs
can create an exception to the promise, and even render it void.” The
principle derived from the reason of the promise, must solve the ques-
tion. If it be certain and manifest, that the consideration of the presentstate
of things was one of the reasons which occasioned the promise,—that the
promise was made in consideration or in consequence of that state of
things,—it depends on the preservation of things in the same state. This is
evident, since the promise was made only upon that supposition. When
therefore that state of things, which was essential to the promise, and
without which it certainly would not have been made, happens to be
changed, the promise falls to the ground, when its foundation fails. And
in particular cases where things cease for a time to be in the state that
has produced or concurred to produce the promise, an exception is to
80. Charles Emmanuel III, son of Victor Amadeus II and king of Sardinia, r.
1730–73.
§295. How
it ought to
restrict the
signiﬁcation
agreeably to
the subject.
§296. How
a change
happening
in the state
of things
may form an
exception.


430
book ii: nations in relation to other states
be made to it. An elective prince being without issue, has promised to
an ally that he will procure his appointment to the succession. He has a
son born: who can doubt that the promise is made void by this event?
He who in a time of peace has promised succours to an ally, is notbound
to give him any when he himself has need of all his forces for thedefence
of his own dominions. A prince, possessed of no very formidablepower,
has received from his allies a promise of faithful and constant assistance,
in order to his aggrandisement,—in order to enable him to obtain a
neighbouring state by election or by marriage: yet those allies will have
just grounds for refusing him the smallest aid or support, and evenform-
ing an alliance against him, when they see him elevated to such a height
of power, as to threaten the liberties of all Europe. If the great Gustavus
had not been killed at Lutzen,81 cardinal de Richelieu, who had con-
cluded an alliance for his master with that prince, and who had invited
him into Germany, and assisted him with money, would perhaps have
found himself obliged to traverse the designs of that conqueror, when
become formidable,—to set bounds to his astonishing progress, and to
support his humbled enemies. The states-general of the United Prov-
inces conducted themselves on these principles in 1668. In favour of
Spain, which before had been their mortal enemy, they formed thetriple
alliance against Louis XIV. their former ally. It was necessary to raise a
barrier to check the progress of a power which threatened to inundate
and overwhelm all before it.
But we ought to be very cautious and moderate in the application of
the present rule: it would be a shameful perversion of it, to take advan-
tage of every change that happens in the state of affairs, in order to dis-
engage ourselves from our promises: were such conduct adopted, there
could be no dependence placed on any promise whatever. That state of
things alone, in consideration of which the promise was made, is essen-
tial to the promise: and it is only by a change in that state, that the effect
of the promise can be lawfully prevented or suspended.—Such is the
81. Gustavus Adolphus, king of Sweden, was killed in the battle of Lu¨tzen in
1632.


chapter xvii
431
<262> sense in which we are to understand that maxim of the civilians,
conventio omnis intelligitur rebus sic stantibus.82
What we say of promises, must also be understood as extending to
laws. A law which relates to a certain situation of affairs can only take
place in that situation. We ought to reason in the same manner with
respect to a commission. Thus, Titus83 being sent by his father to pay
his respects to the emperor, turned back on being informed of the death
of Galba.84
In unforeseen cases, that is to say, when the state of things happens to
be such as the author of a deed has not foreseen, and could not have
thought of, we should rather be guided by his intention than by his words,
and interpret the instrument as he himself would interpret it if he were on
the spot, or conformably to what he would have done if he had foreseen the
circumstances whichare at presentknown. Thisruleisof greatusetojudges,
and to all those in society who are appointed to carry into effect the tes-
tamentary regulations of the citizens. A father appoints by will a guardian
for his children, who are under age. After his death the magistrate ﬁnds
that the guardian he has nominated is an extravagant proﬂigate, without
property or conduct: he therefore dismisses him, and appoints another,
according to the Roman laws,* adhering to the intention of the testator,
and not to his words; for it is but reasonable to suppose,—and we are to
presume it as a fact,—that the father never intended to give his children
a guardian who should ruin them, and that he would have nominated
another, had he known the vices of the person he appointed.
When the things which constitute the reason of a law or convention, are
considered, not as actually existing, but simply as possible,—or, in other
words, when the fear of an event is the reason of a law or a promise, no
other cases can be excepted from it, than those in which it can be proved to
demonstration that the event is really impossible. The bare possibility of
* Digest [[of Justinian]]. lib. xxvi. tit. iii. De Conﬁrm. Tutor. leg. 10.
82. “In every convention it must be understood that material conditions must
remain the same” (trans. Eds.).
83. Titus Flavius Vespasianus (a.d. 39–81), son of Vespasian (r. a.d. 69–79), suc-
ceeded his father as Roman emperor, r. a.d. 79–81.
84. Servius Sulpicius Galba (3 b.c.–a.d. 69), Roman emperor, r. a.d. 68–69.
§297. Inter-
pretation
of a deed in
unforeseen
cases.
§298. Reasons
arising from
the possibility
and not the
existence of
a thing.

432
book ii: nations in relation to other states
the event is sufﬁcient to preclude all exceptions. If, for instance, a treaty
declares that no army or ﬂeet shall be conducted to a certain place, it will
not be allowable to conduct thither an army or a ﬂeet, under pretence
that no harm is intended by such a step: for the object of a clause of this
nature is not only to prevent a real evil, but also to keep all danger at a
distance, and to avoid even the slightest subject of uneasiness. It is the
same with the law which forbids walking the streets by night with a
lighted torch or candle. It would be an unavailing plea for the trans-
gressor of that law to allege that no mischief has ensued, and that he
carried his torch with such circumspection, that no ill consequence was
to be apprehended. The bare possibility of causing a conﬂagration was
sufﬁcient to have rendered it his duty to obey the law; and he has trans-
gressed it by ex-<263>citing fears which it was the intention of the leg-
islature to prevent.
At the beginning of this chapter, we observed that men’s ideas and
language are not always perfectly determinate. There is, doubtless, no
language in which there do not occur expressions, words, or entire
phrases, susceptible of a more or less extensive signiﬁcation. Many a
word is equally applicable to the genus or the species:—the word fault
implies intentionalguilt orsimpleerror:—severalspeciesof animalshave
but one name common to both sexes, as partridge, lark, sparrow, &c.—
when we speak of horses merely with a view to the services they render
to mankind, mares also are comprehended under thatname.Intechnical
language a word has sometimes a more and sometimes a less extensive
sense, than in vulgar use: the word death, among civilians, signiﬁes not
only natural death, but also civil death: verbum, in the Latin grammar,
signiﬁes only that part of speech called the verb; but, in common use,
it signiﬁes any word in general. Frequently also the same phrase implies
more things on one occasion, and fewer on another, according to the
nature of the subject or matter: thus, when we talk of sending succours,
sometimes we understand a body of auxiliary troops maintained and
paid by the party who sends them, at other times a body whose expenses
are to be entirely defrayed by the party who receives them. It is therefore
necessary to establish rules for the interpretation of those indeterminate
expressions, in order to ascertain the cases in which they are to be un-
§299. Expres-
sions capable
of an extensive
and a limited
sense.


chapter xvii
433
derstood in the more extensive sense, and those in which they are to be
restricted to their more limited meaning. Many of the rules we have
already given may serve for this purpose.
But it is to this head that the famous distinction, between things of
a favourable and those of an odious nature, particularly belongs. Some
writers have rejected the distinction,*—doubtless, for want of properly
understanding it.85 In fact, the deﬁnitions that have been given of what
is favourable and what is odious, are not fully satisfactory, nor easily ap-
plied. After having maturely considered what the most judiciousauthors
have written on the subject, I conceive the whole of the question to be
reducible to the following positions, which convey a just idea of that
famous distinction. When the provisions of a law or a convention are
plain, clear, determinate, and attended with no doubt or difﬁculty in the
application, there is no room for any interpretation or comment (§263).
The precise point of the will of the legislature or the contractingparties,
is what we must adhere to. But if their expressions are indeterminate,
vague, or susceptible of a more or less extensive sense,—if that precise
point of their intention cannot, in the particular case in question, be
discovered and ﬁxed by the other rules of interpretation,—wemustpre-
sume it according to the laws of reason and <264> equity: and, for this
purpose, it is necessary to pay attention to the nature of the things to
which the question relates. There are certain things of which equity ad-
mits the extension rather than the restriction; that is to say, that, with
respect to those things, the precise point of the will not being discovered
in the expressions of the law or the contract, it is safer and more con-
sistent with equity, to suppose and ﬁx that point in the more extensive
than in the more limited sense of the terms,—to give a latitude to the
meaning of the expressions, than to restrict it. These arethethingscalled
favourable. Odious things, on the other hand, are those, of which the
restriction tends more certainly to equity, than the extension. Let us ﬁg-
* See Barbeyrac’s remarks on Grotius and Puffendorf.
85. Jean Barbeyrac (1674–1744) commented on Grotius’s De jure belli in his edi-
tion of 1720 (Amsterdam) and on Pufendorf’s Les devoirs de l’homme et du citoien in
his edition of 1707 (Amsterdam).
§300. Of
things favour-
able, and
things odious.


434
book ii: nations in relation to other states
ure to ourselves the intention or the will of the legislature or the con-
tracting parties, as a ﬁxed point. At that point precisely should we stop,
if it be clearly known;—if uncertain, we should at least endeavour to
approach it. In things favourable, it is better to pass beyond that point,
than not to reach it; in things odious, it is better not to reach it, than to
pass beyond it.
It will not now be difﬁcult to shew, in general, what things are fa-
vourable, and what are odious. In the ﬁrst place, every thing that tends to
the common advantage in conventions, or that has a tendency to place the
contracting parties on a footing of equality, is favourable. The voice of
equity, and the general rule of contracts, require that the conditions be-
tween the parties should be equal. We are not to presume, without very
strong reasons, that one of the contracting parties intended to favour
the other to his own prejudice; but there is no danger in extending what
is for the common advantage. If, therefore, it happens that the contract-
ing parties have not made known their will with sufﬁcient clearness,and
with all the necessary precision, it is certainly more conformable to eq-
uity to seek for that will in the sense most favourable to equality and the
common advantage, than to suppose it in the contrary sense. For the
same reason, every thing that is not for the common advantage, every thing
that tends to destroy the equality of a contract, every thing that onerates only
one of the parties, or that onerates the one more than the other, is odious. In
a treaty of strict friendship, union, and alliance,everythingwhich,with-
out being burthensome to any of the parties, tends to the common ad-
vantage of the confederacy, and to draw the bonds of union closer, is
favourable. In unequal treaties, and especially in unequal alliances, all
the clauses of inequality, and principally those that onerate the inferior
ally, are odious. Upon this principle, that we ought, in case of doubt, to
extend what leads to equality, and restrict what destroys it, is founded
that well-known rule—Incommoda vitantis melior quam commoda pe-
tentis est causa,*—the party who endeavours to avoid a loss, has a better
cause to support than he who aims at obtaining an advantage. <265>
* Quintilian, Instit. Orat. lib. vii. cap. iv.
§301. What
tends to the
common
advantage,
and to
equality, is
favourable;
the contrary
is odious.


chapter xvii
435
All those things which, without proving too burthensome to any one in
particular, are useful and salutary to human society, are to be ranked in the
class of favourablethings: foranationisalreadyunderanaturalobligation
with respect to things of this nature; so that if she has entered into any
particular engagements of this kind, we run no risk in giving those en-
gagements the most extensive meaning of which they are susceptible.
Can we be afraid of violating the rules of equity by following the law
of nature, and giving the utmost extent to obligations that tend to the
common advantage of mankind? Besides, things which are useful to hu-
man society, are, from that very circumstance,conducivetothecommon
advantage of the contracting parties, and are consequently favourable
(see the preceding section). On the other hand, let us consider as odious,
every thing that is, in its own nature, rather injurious than useful to man-
kind. Those things which have a tendency to promote peace are fa-
vourable; those that lead to war are odious.
Every thing that contains a penalty, is odious. With respect to the laws,
it is universally agreed, that, in case of doubt, the judge ought to incline
to the merciful side, and that it is indisputably better to suffer a guilty
person to escape, than to punish one who is innocent. Penal clauses in
treaties lay a burthen upon one of the parties; they are therefore odious
(§301).
Whatever tends to render a deed void and ineffectual, either in the whole
or in part, and consequently, whatever introduces any change in things
already agreed upon, is odious: for men treat together with a view to their
common beneﬁt; and if I enjoy any particular advantage acquired by a
lawful contract, I must not be deprived of it except by my own renun-
ciation. When therefore I consent to new clauses that seem to derogate
from it, I can lose my right only so far as I have clearly given it up; and
consequently these new clauses are to be understood in the most limited
sense they will admit of; as is the case in things of an odious nature
(§300). If that which tends to render a deed void and ineffectual, is con-
tained in the deed itself, it is evident that such passages ought to be con-
strued in the most limited sense, in the sense best calculated to preserve
the deed in force. We have already seen, that we should reject every in-
terpretation which tends to render a deed void and ineffectual (§283).
§302. What is
useful to
human society,
is favourable;
the contrary is
odious.
§303. What-
ever contains
a penalty, is
odious.
§304. What-
ever renders a
deed void, is
odious.


436
book ii: nations in relation to other states
Whatever tends to change the present state of things, is also to be ranked
in the class of odious things: for the proprietor cannot be deprived of his
right except so far, precisely, as he relinquishes it on his part; and in case
of doubt, the presumption is in favour of the possessor. It is less repug-
nant to equity to with-hold from the owner a possession which he has
lost through his own neglect, than to strip the just possessor of what
lawfully belongs to him. In the interpretation, therefore,weoughtrather
to hazard the former inconvenience than the latter. Here also may be
applied, inmany cases, therulewehavementionedin §301,thattheparty
who endeavours to avoid a loss, has a better cause to support than he
who aims at obtaining an advantage. <266>
Finally, there are things which are at once of a favourable or an odious
nature, according to the point of view in which they are considered.
Whatever derogates from treaties, or changes the state of things, is odi-
ous; but if it is conducive to peace, it is, in that particular, favourable.
A degree of odium always attaches to penalties: they may, however, be
viewed in afavourable lightonthoseoccasionswhentheyareparticularly
necessary for the safety of society. When thereisquestionof interpreting
things of this nature, we ought to consider whether what is favourable
in them greatly exceeds what appears odious,—whether the advantage
that arises from their being extended to the utmost latitude of whichthe
terms are susceptible, will materially outweigh the severe and odiouscir-
cumstances attending them; and if that is the case, they are to be ranked
in the class of favourable things. Thus an inconsiderable change in the
state of things or in conventionsisreckonedasnothing,whenitprocures
the inestimable blessings of peace. In the same manner, penal laws may
be interpreted in their most extensive meaning, on critical occasions
when such an instance of severity becomes necessary to the safety of the
state. Cicero caused the accomplices of Catiline86 to be executed by vir-
tue of a decree of the senate,—the safety of the republic rendering it
impropertowaittilltheyshouldbecondemnedbythepeople.Butwhere
86. Lucius Sergius Catilina, ca. 108–62 b.c., Roman politician and soldier noto-
riously denounced by Cicero for seeking to overthrow the republic.
§305. What-
ever tends to
change the
present state
of things, is
odious; the
contrary is
favourable.
§306. Things
of a mixed
nature.


chapter xvii
437
there is not so great a disproportion in the case, and where things are in
other respects equal, favour inclines to that side of the question which
presents nothing odious;—that is to say, we ought to abstainfromthings
of an odious nature, unless the attendant advantage so far exceed the
odious part, as in a manner to conceal it from view. If there be any ap-
pearance, however small, of an equilibrium between the odious and the
favourable in one of those things of a mixed nature, it is ranked in the
class of odious things, by a natural consequence drawn from the prin-
ciple on which we have founded the distinction between things of a
favourable and things of an odious nature (§300), because, in case of
doubt, we should in preference pursue that line of conduct by which we
are least exposed to deviate from the principles of equity. In a doubtful
case, we may reasonably refuse to give succours (though a thing favour-
able), when there is question of giving them against an ally,—which
would be odious.
The following are the rules of interpretation, which ﬂow from the
principles we have just laid down.
1. When the question relates to things favourable, we ought to give the
terms the utmost latitude of which they are susceptible according to the com-
mon usage of the language; and if a term has more than one signiﬁcation,
the most extensive meaning is to be preferred: for equity ought to be the
rule of conduct with all mankind wherever a perfect right is not exactly
determined and known in its precise extent. When the legislature or the
contracting parties have not expressed their will in terms that are precise
and perfectly determinate, it is to be presumed that they<267>intended
what is most equitable. Now, when there is question of favourable
things, the more extensive signiﬁcation of the terms accords better with
equity than their more conﬁned signiﬁcation. Thus Cicero, in pleading
the cause of Caecina, justly maintains that the interlocutory decree, or-
daining, “that the person expelled from his inheritance be reinstated in the
possession,” should be understood as extending to the man who has been
forcibly prevented from entering upon it:* and the Digest decides it in
* Orat. pro Caecina, cap. xxiii.
§307. Inter-
pretation of
favourable
things.

438
book ii: nations in relation to other states
the same manner.* It is true that this decision is also founded on the rule
taken from parity of reasoning (§290). For it amounts to the same thing
in effect, to drive a person from his inheritance, or forcibly to prevent
him from entering upon it; and, in both cases, the same reason exists for
putting him in possession.
2. In questions relating to favourable things, all terms of art are to be
interpreted in the fullest latitude of which they are susceptible, not only in
common usage, but also as technical terms, if the person speaking under-
stands the art to which those terms belong, or conducts himself by the advice
of men who understand that art.
3. But we ought not, from the single reason that a thing is favourable, to
take the terms in an improper signiﬁcation:thisisnotallowable,exceptwhen
necessary in order to avoid absurdity, injustice, or the nullity of the instru-
ment, as is practised on every subject (§§282, 283): for we ought to take
the terms of a deed in their proper sense, conformably to custom, unless
we have very strong reasons for deviating from it (§271).
4. Though a thing appears favourable when viewed in one particular
light,—yet, where the proper meaning of the terms would, if taken in its
utmost latitude, lead to absurdity or injustice, their signiﬁcation must be
restricted according to the rules given above (§§293, 294). For here, in this
particular case, the thing becomes of a mixed nature, and even such as
ought to be ranked in the class of odious things.
5. For the same reason, although neither absurdity nor injustice results
from the proper meaning of the terms,—if, nevertheless, manifest equity or
a great common advantage requires their restriction, we ought to adhere to
the most limited sense which the proper signiﬁcation will admit, even in an
affair that appears favourable in its own nature,—because here also the
thing is of a mixed kind, and ought, in this particular case, to be es-
teemed odious. As to the rest, it is to be carefully remembered that all
these rules relate only to doubtful cases; since we are not allowed to go
in quest of interpretations for what is already clear and determinate
(§263). If any one has clearly and formally bound himself to burthen-
* Digest [[of Justinian]]. lib. xliii. tit. xvi. De Vi, et Vi Armata, legg. 1 et 3.
chapter xvii
439
some conditions, he has knowingly and willingly done it, and cannot
afterwards be admitted to appeal to equity.
Since odious things are those whose restriction tends more certainly
to equity than their extension,—and since we ought to <268> pursue
that line which is most conformable to equity, when the will of the leg-
islature or of the contracting parties is not exactly determined and pre-
cisely known,—we should, when thereisquestionof odiousthings,interpret
the terms in the most limited sense: we may even, to a certain degree, adopt
a ﬁgurative meaning, in order to avert the oppressive consequences of the
proper and literal sense, or any thing of an odious nature, which it would
involve: for we are to favour equity, and to do away every thing odious,
as far as that can be accomplished without going in direct opposition to
the tenor of the instrument, or visibly wresting the text. Now neither
the limited nor even the ﬁgurative sense offers any violence to the text.
If it is said in a treaty, that one of the allies shall assist the other with a
certain number of troops at his own expense, and that the latter shall
furnish the same number of auxiliary troops at the expense of the party
to whom they are sent, there is something odious in the engagement of
the former ally, since he is subject to a greater burthen than the other:
but the terms being clear and express, there is no room for any restrictive
interpretation. But if it were stipulated in this treaty, that one of the
allies shall furnish a body of ten thousand men, and the other only of
ﬁve thousand, without mentioning the expense, it ought to be under-
stood that the auxiliary troops shall be supported at the expense of the
ally to whose assistance they are sent; this interpretation beingnecessary,
in order that the inequality between the contracting powers may not be
carried too far. Thus the cession of a right or of a province, made to a
conqueror in order to obtain peace, is interpreted in its most conﬁned
sense. If it be true that the boundaries of Acadia have always been un-
certain, and that the French were the lawful possessors of it, that nation
will be justiﬁed in maintainingthattheircessionof AcadiatotheEnglish
by the treaty of Utrecht did not extend beyond the narrowest limits of
that province.
In point of penalties, in particular when they are really odious, we
ought not only to restrict the terms of the law, or of the contract, to
§308. Inter-
pretation of
odious things.


440
book ii: nations in relation to other states
their most limited signiﬁcation, and even adopt a ﬁgurative meaning,
according as the case may require or authorise it,—but also to admit of
reasonable excuses; which is a kind of restrictive interpretation,tending
to exempt the party from the penalty.
The same conduct must be observed with respect to what may render
an act void and without effect. Thus, when it is agreed that the treaty
shall be dissolved whenever one of the contracting parties fails in the
observance of any article of it, it would be at once both unreasonable
and contrary to the end proposed in making treaties, to extend that
clause to the slightest faults, and to cases in which thedefaultercanallege
well-grounded excuses.
Grotius proposes the following question—“Whether, in a treaty
which makes mention of allies, we are to understand those only who
were in alliance at the time when the treaty was made, or <269> all the
allies present and future?”* And he gives, as an instance, that article of
the treaty concluded between the Romans and Carthaginians, after the
war of Sicily,—that “neither of the two nations should do any injury to
the allies of the other.” In order to understand this part of the treaty, it
is necessary to call to mind the barbarous law of nations observed by
those ancient people. They thought themselves authorisedtoattack,and
to treat as enemies, all with whom they were not united by any alliance.
The article therefore signiﬁes, that on both sides they should treat as
friends the allies of their ally, and abstain from molesting or invading
them: upon this footing it is in all respects so favourable, so conformable
to humanity, and to the sentiments which ought to unite two allies, that
it should, without hesitation, be extended to all the allies, present and
future. The clause cannot be said to involve any thing of an odious na-
ture, as cramping the freedom of a sovereign state, or tending todissolve
an alliance: for, by engaging not to injure the allies of another power,
we do not deprive ourselves of the liberty to make war on them if they
give us just cause for hostilities; and when a clause is just and reasonable,
it does not become odious from the single circumstance that it may per-
haps eventually occasion a rupture of the alliance. Were that to be the
* Lib. ii. cap. xvi. §13 [[Law of War and Peace]].
§309.
Examples.


chapter xvii
441
case, there could be no clause whatever, that might not be deemed odi-
ous. This reason, which we have touched upon in the preceding section
and in §304, holds good only in doubtful cases: in the case before us, for
instance, it ought to have prevented a too hasty decision that the Car-
thaginians had causelessly attacked an ally of the Romans. The Car-
thaginians, therefore, might, without any violation of the treaty, attack
Saguntum, if they had lawful grounds for such an attack, or (in virtue
of the voluntary law of nations) even apparent or speciousgrounds(Pre-
lim. §21). But they might have attacked in the same manner the most
ancient ally of the Romans; and the Romans might also, without break-
ing the treaty of peace, have conﬁned themselves to the succouring of
Saguntum. At present, treaties include the allies on both sides: but this
does not imply that one of the contracting powers may not make war
on the allies of the other if they give him cause for it,—but simply, that,
in case of any quarrel arising between them, each of the contracting
parties reserves to himself a power of assisting hismoreancientally:and,
in this sense, the future allies are not included in the treaty.
Another example mentioned by Grotius is also taken from a treaty
concluded between Rome and Carthage. When the latter city was re-
duced to extremities by Scipio Aemilianus, and obliged to capitulate,87
the Romans promised “that Carthage should remain free, or in posses-
sion of the privilege of governing herself by her own laws.”* In the se-
quel, however, those merciless conquerors pretended that the promised
liberty regarded the <270> inhabitants, and not the city: they insisted
that Carthage should be demolished, and that the wretched inhabitants
should settle in a place at a greater distance from the sea. One cannot
read the account of this perﬁdious and cruel treatment, without being
concerned that the great, the amiable Scipio was obliged to be the in-
strumentof it.Tosaynothingof thechicaneryof theRomansrespecting
the meaning to be annexed to the word “Carthage,”—certainly, the “lib-
erty” promised to the Carthaginians, though narrowly circumscribedby
* Autonomoc. Appian. de Bello Punico.
87. Under the Roman general Scipio Aemilianus, the city of Carthage was de-
stroyed in 146 b.c.


442
book ii: nations in relation to other states
the existing state of affairs, should at least have extended to the privilege
of remaining in their city. To ﬁnd themselves obliged to abandon it and
settle elsewhere,—to lose their houses, their port, and the advantages of
their situation,—was a subjection incompatible with the smallestdegree
of liberty, and involved such considerable losses as they could not have
bound themselves to submit to, unless by a positive engagement in the
most express and formal terms.
Liberal promises, benefactions, and rewards, naturally come under
the class of favourable things, and receive an extensive interpretation,
unless they prove onerous or unreasonably chargeable to the benefactor,
or that other circumstances evidently shew they are to be taken in a lim-
ited sense. For kindness, benevolence, beneﬁcence, and generosity, are
liberal virtues; they do not act in a penurious manner,andknownoother
bounds than those set by reason. But if the benefaction falls too heavy
upon him who grants it, in this respect it partakes of the odious; and,
in case of doubt, equity will not admit the presumption that it has been
granted or promised in the utmost extent of the terms: we ought there-
fore, in such case, to conﬁne ourselves to the most limited signiﬁcation
which the words are capable of receiving, and thus reduce the benefac-
tion within the bounds of reason. The same mode should be adopted
when other circumstances evidently point out the more limited signi-
ﬁcation as the more equitable.
Upon these principles, the bounties of a sovereign are usually taken
in the fullest extent of the terms.* It is not presumed that he ﬁnds him-
self over-burthened by them: it is a respect due to majesty, to suppose
that he had good reasons to induce him to confer them. They are there-
fore, in their own nature, altogether favourable; and, in order to restrict
them, it must be proved that they are burthensome to the prince, or
prejudicial to the state. On the whole, we ought to apply to deeds of
* Such is the decision of the Roman law.—Javolenus [[Javolenus Priscus,Roman
jurist, praetor, and proconsul, a.d. 60–120]] says: “Beneﬁcium imperatoris quam
plenissime interpretari debemus”; and he gives this reason for it, “quod a divina ejus
indulgentia proﬁciscatur.” [[“We should interpret the bounty of the emperor as gen-
erously as possible . . . because it proceeds from his divine permissiveness.”]] Digest
[[of Justinian]]. lib. i. tit. iv. de Constit. Princ. leg. 3.
§310. How we
ought to inter-
pret deeds of
pure liberality.


chapter xvii
443
pure liberality the general rule established above (§270); if those instru-
ments are not precise and very determinate, they should be interpreted
as meaning what the author probably had in his mind. <271>
Let us conclude this subject of interpretation with what relates to the
collision or opposition of laws or treaties. We do not here speak of the
collision of a treaty with the law of nature: the latter is unquestionably
paramount, as we have proved elsewhere (§§160, 161, 170, and 293).
There is a collision or opposition between two laws, two promises, or
two treaties, when a case occurs in which it is impossible to fulﬁl both
at the same time, though otherwise the laws or treaties in question are
not contradictory, and may be both fulﬁlled under different circum-
stances. They are considered as contrary in this particular case; and it is
required to shew which deserves the preference, or towhichanexception
ought to be made on the occasion. In order to guard against all mistake
in the business, and to make the exception conformably to reason and
justice, we should observe the following rules.
1. In all cases where what is barely permitted is found incompatible with
what is positively prescribed, the latter claims a preference: for the mere
permission imposes no obligation to do or not to do: what is permitted
is left to our own option: we are at liberty either to do it or forbear to
do it. But we have not the same liberty with respect to whatisprescribed:
we are obliged to do that: nor can the bare permission in the former case
interfere with the discharge of our obligation in the latter; but, on the
contrary, that which was before permitted in general, ceases to be so in
this particular instance, where we cannot take advantage of the permis-
sion without violating a positive duty.
2. In the same manner, the law or treaty which permits, ought to give
way to the law or treaty which forbids: for the prohibitionmustbeobeyed;
and what was, in its own nature, or in general, permitted, must not be
attempted when it cannot be done without contravening a prohibition:
the permission, in that case, ceases to be available.
3. All circumstances being otherwise equal, the law or the treaty which
ordains, gives way to the law or the treaty which forbids. I say, “all circum-
stances being otherwise equal”; for many otherreasonsmayoccur,which
will authorise the exception being made to the prohibitory law or treaty.
§311. Colli-
sion of laws or
treaties.
§312. First
rule in cases
of collision.
§313.
2d Rule.
§314.
3d Rule.

444
book iii
Of War.
chapter i
Of War,—its different Kinds,—and the
Right of making War.
Sect. 1. Deﬁnition of war.
page 291
2. Public war,
291
3. Right of making war,
291
4. It belongs only to the sovereign power,
292
5. Defensive and offensive war,
293
chapter ii
Of the Instruments of war,—the raising of Troops,
&c.—their Commanders, or the Subordinate
Powers in War.
6. Instruments of war,
293
7. Right of levying troops,
294
8. Obligation of the citizens or subjects,
294
9. Enlisting or raising of troops,
294
10. Whether there be any exemptions from
carrying arms,
294
11. Soldiers’ pay and quarters,
296
12. Hospitals for invalids,
296
13. Mercenary soldiers,
297
14. Rule to be observed in their enlistment,
298
15. Enlisting in foreign countries,
298
16. Obligation of soldiers,
299
17. Military laws,
299
18. Military discipline,
299
19. Subordinate powers in war,
299
20. How their promises bind the sovereign,
300
21. In what cases their promises bind only themselves,
300
22. Their assumption of an authority which they do
not possess,
300
23. How they bind their inferiors,
301


original contents
49
chapter iii
Of the just Causes of War.
Sect. 24. War never to be undertaken without very
cogent reasons,
page 301
25. Justiﬁcatory reasons, and motives for making war,
301
26. What is in general a just cause of war,
302
27. What war is unjust,
302
28. The object of war,
302
29. Both justiﬁcatory reasons and proper motives
requisite in undertaking a war,
303
30. Proper motives—vicious motives, <xliii>
303
31. War undertaken upon just grounds, but from
vicious motives,
303
32. Pretexts,
304
33. War undertaken merely for advantage,
304
34. Nations who make war without reason or
apparent motives,
305
35. How defensive war is just or unjust,
305
36. How it may become just against an offensive war
which was originally just,
305
37. How an offensive war is just in an evident cause,
305
38. in a doubtful cause,
306
39. War cannot be just on both sides,
306
40. Sometimes reputed lawful,
306
41. War undertaken to punish a nation,
307
42. Whether the aggrandisement of a neighbouring
power can authorise a war against him,
307
43. Alone, and of itself, it cannot give a right to
attack him,
308
44. How the appearances of danger give that right,
309
45. Another case more evident,
310
46. Other allowable means of defence against a
formidable power,
311
47. Political equilibrium,
311
48. Ways of maintaining it,
312
49. How he that destroys the equilibrium, may be
restrained, or even weakened,
312
50. Behaviour allowable towards a neighbour preparing
for war,
313


50
original contents
chapter iv
Of the Declaration of War,—and of
War in due Form.
Sect. 51. Declaration of war:—necessity thereof,
page 315
52. What it is to contain,
315
53. It is simple or conditional,
316
54. The right to make war ceases on the offer of
equitable conditions,
316
55. Formalities of a declaration of war,
316
56. Other reasons for the necessity of its publication,
316
57. Defensive war requires no declaration,
317
58. When it may be omitted in an offensive war,
317
59. It is not to be omitted by way of retaliation,
317
60. Time of the declaration,
317
61. Duty of the inhabitants on a foreign army’s
entering a country before a declaration of war,
317
62. Commencement of hostilities,
318
63. Conduct to be observed towards the enemy’s
subjects who are in the country at the time of the
declaration of war,
318
64. Publication of the war, and manifestoes,
318
65. Decorum and moderation to be observed in
the manifestoes,
319
66. What is a lawful war in due form,
319
67. It is to be distinguished from informal and
unlawful war,
320
68. Grounds of this distinction, <xliv>
320
chapter v
Of the Enemy, and of Things belonging
to the Enemy.
69. Who is an enemy,
321
70. All the subjects of the two states at war are enemies,
321
71. and continue to be enemies in all places,
321
72. Whether women and children are to be
accounted enemies,
321
73. Things belonging to the enemy,
322
74. continue such every-where,
322
75. Neutral things found with an enemy,
322

original contents
51
Sect. 76. Lands possessed by foreigners in an
enemy’s country,
page 322
77. Things due to the enemy by a third party,
322
chapter vi
Of the Enemy’s Allies,—of warlike Associations,—
of Auxiliaries and Subsidies.
78. Treaties relative to war,
323
79. Defensive and offensive alliances,
323
80. Difference between warlike alliances and
defensive treaties,
324
81. Auxiliary troops,
324
82. Subsidies,
324
83. When a nation is authorised to assist another,
324
84. and to make alliances for war,
324
85. Alliances made with a nation actually engaged
in war,
325
86. Tacit clause in every warlike alliance,
325
87. To refuse succours for an unjust war, is no breach
of alliance,
326
88. What the casus foederis is,
326
89. It never takes place in an unjust war,
326
90. How it exists in a defensive war,
326
91. and in a treaty of a guaranty,
326
92. The succour is not due under an inability to
furnish it, or when the public safety would
be exposed,
326
93. Other cases:—two of the parties in an alliance
coming to a rupture,
327
94. Refusal of the succours due in virtue of
an alliance,
327
95. The enemy’s associates,
328
96. Those who make a common cause with the enemy
are his associates,
328
97. and those who assist him, without being obliged to
it by treaties,
328
98. or who are in an offensive alliance with him,
329
99. How a defensive alliance associates with
the enemy,
329
100. Another case,
329


52
original contents
Sect. 101. In what case it does not produce the same
effect, <xlv>
page 330
102. Whether it be necessary to declare war against the
enemy’s associates,
331
chapter vii
Of Neutrality,—and the Passage of Troops through
a Neutral Country.
103. Neutral nations,
332
104. Conduct to be pursued by a neutral nation,
332
105. An ally may furnish the succour due from him,
and remain neuter,
333
106. Right of remaining neuter,
333
107. Treaties of neutrality,
333
108. Additional reason for making those treaties,
334
109. Foundation of the rules of neutrality,
334
110. How levies may be allowed, money lent, and every
kind of things sold, without a breach of neutrality,
334
111. Trade of neutral nations with those which are
at war,
335
112. Contraband goods,
336
113. Whether such goods may be conﬁscated,
337
114. Searching neutral ships,
339
115. Enemy’s property on board a neutral ship,
339
116. Neutral property on board an enemy’s ship,
339
117. Trade with a besieged town,
339
118. Impartial ofﬁces of neutrals,
340
119. Passage of troops through a neutral country,
340
120. Passage to be asked,
340
121. It may be refused for good reasons,
341
122. In what case it may be forced,
341
123. The fear of danger authorises a refusal,
342
124. or a demand of every reasonable security,
342
125. Whether always necessary to give every kind of
security required,
342
126. Equality to be observed towards both parties, as to
the passage,
343
127. No complaint lies against a neutral state for
granting a passage,
343
128. That state may refuse it from fear of the
resentment of the opposite party,
343


original contents
53
Sect. 129. and lest her country should become the
theatre of war,
page 343
130. What is included in the grant of passage,
344
131. Safety of the passage,
344
132. No hostility to be committed in a neutral country,
344
133. Neutral country not to afford a retreat to troops,
that they may again attack their enemies,
345
134. Conduct to be pursued by troops passing through
a neutral country,
345
135. A passage may be refused for a war evidently
unjust, <xlvi>
345
chapter viii
Of the Rights of Nations in War,—and ﬁrst, of what
we have a Right to do, and what we are allowed to
do, to the Enemy’s Person in a just War.
136. General principle of the rights against an enemy in
a just war,
346
137. Difference between what we have a right to do,
and what is barely allowed to be done with
impunity between enemies,
346
138. The right to weaken an enemy by every
justiﬁable method,
347
139. The right over the enemy’s person,
347
140. Limits of that right:—an enemy not to be killed
after ceasing to resist;
347
141. A particular case, in which quarter may be refused,
348
142. Reprisals,
348
143. Whether a governor of a town can be punished
with death for an obstinate defence,
349
144. Fugitives and deserters,
351
145. Women, children, the aged, and sick,
351
146. Clergy, men of letters, &c.
352
147. Peasants, and, in general, all who do not
carry arms,
352
148. The right of making prisoners of war,
353
149. A prisoner of war not to be put to death,
354
150. How prisoners of war are to be treated,
354
151. Whether prisoners, who cannot be kept or fed,
may be put to death,
355
152. Whether prisoners of war may be made slaves,
356


54
original contents
Sect. 153. Exchange and ransom of prisoners,
page 357
154. The state is bound to procure their release,
357
155. Whether an enemy may lawfully be assassinated
or poisoned,
358
156. Whether poisoned weapons may be used in war,
361
157. Whether springs may be poisoned,
361
158. Disposition to be entertained towards an enemy,
362
159. Tenderness for the person of a king who is in arms
against us,
363
chapter ix
Of the Right of War, with respect to Things
belonging to the Enemy.
160. Principles of the right over things belonging to
the enemy,
364
161. The right of seizing them,
364
162. What is taken from the enemy by way of penalty,
364
163. What is with-held from him, in order to oblige
him to give just satisfaction,
365
164. Booty, <xlvii>
365
165. Contributions,
366
166. Waste and destruction,
366
167. Ravaging and burning,
367
168. What things are to be spared,
368
169. Bombarding towns,
368
170. Demolition of fortresses,
369
171. Safeguards,
369
172. General rule of moderation, respecting the evil
which may be done to an enemy,
369
173. Rule of the voluntary law of nations on the
same subject,
369
chapter x
Of Faith between Enemies,—of Stratagems, Artiﬁces
in War, Spies, and some other Practices.
174. Faith to be sacred between enemies,
371
175. What treaties are to be observed between enemies,
372
176. On what occasions they may be broken,
372
177. Lies,
372
178. Stratagems and artiﬁces in war,
373


original contents
55
Sect. 179. Spies,
page 375
180. Clandestine seduction of the enemy’s people,
376
181. Whether the offers of a traitor may be accepted,
377
182. Deceitful intelligence,
377
chapter xi
Of the Sovereign who wages an unjust War.
183. An unjust war gives no right whatever,
378
184. Great guilt of the sovereign who undertakes it,
378
185. His obligations,
379
186. Difﬁculty of repairing the injury he has done,
379
187. Whether the nation and the military are bound to
any thing,
380
chapter xii
Of the Voluntary Law of Nations, as it regards the
Effects of Regular Warfare, independently of the
Justice of the Cause.
188. Nations not rigidly to enforce the law of nature
against each other,
381
189. Why they are bound to admit the voluntary law
of nations,
381
190. Regular war, as to its effects, is to be accounted
just on both sides,
382
191. Whatever is permitted to one party, is so to
the other,
382
192. The voluntary law gives no more than impunity to
him who wages an unjust war, <xlviii>
383
chapter xiii
Of Acquisitions by War, and particularly
of Conquests.
193. War a mode of acquisition,
384
194. Measure of the right it gives,
384
195. Rules of the voluntary law of nations,
385
196. Acquisition of movable property,
385
197. Acquisition of immovables,—or conquest,
386
198. How to transfer them validly,
387


56
original contents
Sect. 199. Conditions on which a conquered town
is acquired,
page 387
200. Lands of private persons,
388
201. Conquest of the whole state,
388
202. To whom the conquest belongs,
391
203. Whether we are to set at liberty a people whom the
enemy had unjustly conquered,
391
chapter xiv
Of the Right of Postliminium.
204. Deﬁnition of the right of postliminium,
392
205. Foundation of that right,
392
206. How it takes effect,
393
207. Whether it takes effect among the allies,
393
208. Of no validity in neutral nations,
393
209. What things are recoverable by that right,
394
210. Of those who cannot return by the right
of postliminium,
394
211. They enjoy that right when retaken,
394
212. Whether that right extends to their property
alienated by the enemy,
395
213. Whether a nation that has been entirely subdued
can enjoy the right of postliminium,
396
214. Right of postliminium for what is restored at
the peace,
397
215. and for things ceded to the enemy,
397
216. The right of postliminium does not exist after
a peace,
397
217. Why always in force for prisoners,
397
218. They are free even by escaping into a
neutral country,
397
219. How the rights and obligations of
prisoners subsist,
398
220. Testament of a prisoner of war,
398
221. Marriage,
398
222. Regulations established by treaty or custom,
respecting postliminium,
398


original contents
57
book ii: nations in relation to other states
The rules are general; each relates to an abstract idea, and shews what
follows from that idea, without derogation to the other rules. Upon this
footing, it is evident, that, in general, if we cannot obey an injunctive
law without violating a prohibitory one, we should abstain from fulﬁll-
ing the former: for the prohibition is absolute in itself, whereas every
precept, every injunction, is in its own nature conditional, and supposes
the power,orafavourableopportunity,of doingwhatisprescribed.Now
when that cannot be accomplished without contravening a prohibition,
the opportunity is wanting, and this collision of laws produces a moral
impossibility of acting; for what is prescribed in general, is no longer so
in the case where it cannot be done withoutcommittinganaction<272>
that is forbidden.* Upon this ground rests the generally received maxim
that we are not justiﬁable in employing unlawful means to accomplish
a laudable end,—as, for instance, in stealing with a view to give alms.
But it is evident that the question here regards an absolute prohibition,
or those cases to which the general prohibition is truly applicable, and
therefore equivalent to an absolute one: there are, however, many pro-
hibitions to which circumstances form an exception. Our meaning will
be better explained by an example. It is expressly forbidden, for reasons
to me unknown, to pass through a certain place under any pretence
whatsoever. I am ordered to carry a message; I ﬁnd every other avenue
shut; I therefore turn back rather than take my passage over that ground
which is so strictly forbidden. But if the prohibition to pass be only a
general one with a view to prevent any injury being done to the pro-
ductions of the soil, it is easy for me to judge that the orders with which
I am charged ought to form an exception.
As to what relates to treaties, we are not obliged to accomplish what
a treaty prescribes, any farther than we have the power. Now we have
not a power to do what another treaty forbids: wherefore, in case of
* The prohibitory law creates, in that particular instance, an exception to the in-
junctive law. “Deinde utra lex jubeat, utra vetet. Nam saepe ea quae vetat, quasi ex-
ceptione quadam corrigere videtur illam quae jubet.” [[“Then, which lawenjoinsand
which prohibits, for frequently the law that prohibits seems to have amended the law
that enjoins by making an exception.”]] Cicero, de Inventione, lib. ii. 145 [[146]].


chapter xvii
445
collision, an exception is made to the injunctive treaty, and the prohib-
itory treaty has a superior claim to our observance,—provided,however,
that all circumstances be in other respects equal; for it will presently ap-
pear, for instance, that a subsequent treaty cannot derogate from a prior
one concluded with another state, nor hinder its effect directly or
indirectly.
4. The dates of laws or treaties furnish new reasons for establishing
the exception in cases of collision. If the collision happen between two
afﬁrmative laws, or two afﬁrmative treaties concluded between the same
persons or the same states, that which is of more recent date claims a pref-
erence over the older one: for it is evident, that, since both laws or both
treaties have emanated from the same power, the subsequent act was
capable of derogating from the former. Butstill thisisonthesupposition
of circumstances being in other respects equal.—If there be a collision
between two treaties made with two different powers, the more ancient
claims the preference: for, no engagement of a contrary tenor could be
contracted in the subsequent treaty; and if this latter be found, in any
case, incompatible with that of more ancient date, its execution is con-
sidered as impossible, because the person promising had not the power
of acting contrary to his antecedent engagements.
5. Of two laws or two conventions, we ought (all other circumstances
being equal) to prefer the one which is less general, and which approaches
nearer to the point in question: because special matter <273> admits of
fewer exceptions than that which is general; it is enjoined with greater
precision, and appears to have been more pointedly intended. Let us
make use of the following example from Puffendorf:*—Onelawforbids
us to appear in public with arms on holidays: another law commands us
to turn out under arms, and repair to our posts, as soon as we hear the
sound of the alarm-bell. The alarm is rung on a holiday. In such case we
must obey the latter of the two laws, which creates an exception to the
former.
6. What will not admit of delay, is to be preferred to what may be done
at another time. For this is the mode to reconcile every thing, and fulﬁl
* Jus Gent. [[De jure naturae et gentium]] lib. v. cap. xii. §23.
§315.
4th Rule.
§316.
5th Rule.
§317.
6th Rule.


446
book ii: nations in relation to other states
both obligations; whereas if we gave the preference to the one which
might be fulﬁlled at another time, we would unnecessarily reduce our-
selves to the alternative of failing in our observance of the other.
7. When two duties stand in competition, that one which is the more
considerable, the more praiseworthy, and productive of the greater utility, is
entitled to the preference. This rule has no need of proof. But as it relates
to duties that are equally in our power, and, as it were, at our option, we
should carefully guard against the erroneous application of it to two du-
ties which do not really stand in competition, but of which the one ab-
solutely precludes the other,—our obligation to fulﬁl the former wholly
depriving us of the liberty to perform the latter. For instance, it is a more
praiseworthy deed to defend one nation againstan unjustaggressor,than
to assist another in an offensive war. But if the latter be the more ancient
ally, we are not at liberty to refuse her our assistance and give it to the
former; for we stand pre-engaged. There is not, strictly speaking, any
competition between these two duties: they do not lie at our option: the
prior engagement renders the second duty, for the present, impractica-
ble. However, if there were question of preserving a new ally from cer-
tain ruin, and that the more ancient ally were not reduced to the same
extremity, this would be the case to which the foregoing rule should be
applied.
As to what relates to laws in particular, the preference is undoubtedly
to be given to the more important and necessary ones. This is the grand
rule to be observed whenever they are found to clash with each other; it
is the rule which claims the greatest attention, and is therefore placed by
Cicero at the head of all the rules he lays down on the subject.* It is
* “Primum igitur leges oportet contendere, considerando utra lex ad majores, hoc
est, ad utiliores, ad honestiores, ac magis necessarias res pertineat. Ex quo conﬁcitur
ut, si leges duae, aut si plures, aut quotquot erunt, conservari non possint quia dis-
crepent inter se, ea maxime conservanda putetur, quae ad maximas res pertinere vi-
deatur.” [[“In the ﬁrst place then, one should compare the laws by consideringwhich
one deals with the most important matters, that is, the most expedient, honorable,
or necessary. The conclusion from this is that if two laws (or whatever number there
may be if more than two) cannot be kept because they are at variance, the one is
thought to have the greatest claim to be upheld which has reference to the greatest
matters.” De inventione II.145.]] Cicero, ubi supra.
§318.
7th Rule.

chapter xvii
447
counteracting the general aim of the legislature, and the great end of the
laws, to neglect one of great importance, under pretence of observing
another which is less necessary, and of inferior consequence: in <274>
fact, such conduct is criminal; for, a lesser good, if it exclude a greater,
assumes the nature of an evil.
8. If we cannot acquit ourselves at the same time of two things promised
to the same person, it rests with him to choose which of the two we are to
perform; for he may dispense with the other on this particular occasion;
in which case there will no longer be any collision of duties. But if we
cannot obtain a knowledge of his will, we are to presume that the more
important one is his choice; and we should of course give that the preference.
And, in case of doubt, we should perform the one to which we are the more
strongly bound;—it being presumable that he chose to bind us more
strongly to that in which he is more deeply interested.
9. Since the stronger obligationclaimsapreferenceovertheweaker,—
if a treaty that has been conﬁrmed by an oath happens to clash with another
treaty that has not been sworn to,—all circumstances being in other respects
equal, the preference is to be given to the former; because the oath adds a
new force to the obligation. But as it makes no change in the nature of
treaties (§§225, &c.), it cannot, for instance, entitle a new ally to a pref-
erence over a more ancient ally whose treaty has not been conﬁrmed by
an oath.
10. For the same reason, and, all circumstances being in other respects
equal, what is enjoined under a penalty claims a preference over that which
is not enforced by one,—and what is enjoined under a greater penalty, over
that which is enforced by a lesser; for the penal sanction and convention
give additional force to the obligation: they prove thattheobjectinques-
tion was more earnestly desired,* and the more so in proportion as the
penalty is more or less severe.
* This is also the reason which Cicero gives: “Nam maxime conservanda est ea
[lex] quae diligentissime sancta est.” [[“For that law is to be upheld, in which the
penalties are most carefully prescribed.” De inventione II.146.]] Cicero, ubi supra.
§319.
8th Rule.
§320.
9th Rule.
§321.
10th Rule.


448
book ii: nations in relation to other states
All the rules contained in this chapter ought to be combinedtogether,
and the interpretation be made in such manner as to accord with them
all, so far as they are applicable to the case. When these rules appear to
clash, they reciprocally counterbalance and limit each other, according
to their strength and importance, and according as they more particu-
larly belong to the case in question.
chapter xviii
Of the Mode of terminating Disputes
between Nations.
The disputes that arise between nations or their rulers, originate either
from contested rights or from injuries received. A nation ought to pre-
serve the rights which belong to her; and the care of her own safety and
glory forbids her to submit to injuries. But in fulﬁlling the duty which
she owes to her-<275>self, shemustnotforgetherdutiestoothers.These
two views, combined together, will furnish the maxims of the law of
nations respecting the mode of terminating disputes between different
states.
What we have said in Chap. I. IV. and V. of this book, dispenseswith
our proving here, that a nation ought to do justice to all others with
respect to their pretensions, and to remove all their just subjects of com-
plaint. She is therefore bound to render to eachnationwhatisherdue,—
to leave her in the peaceable enjoyment of her rights,—to repair any
damage that she herself may have caused, or any injury she may have
done,—to give adequate satisfaction for such injuries as cannot be re-
paired, and reasonable security against any injury which she has given
cause to apprehend. These are so many maxims evidently dictated by
that justice which nations as well as individuals are, by the law of nature,
bound to observe.
Every one is at liberty to recede from his right, to relinquish a just
subject of complaint, and to forget an injury. But the ruler of a nation
is not, in this respect, sofreeasa privateindividual.Thelattermayattend
solely to the voice of generosity; and, in an affair which concerns none
§322. General
remark on the
manner of
observing all
the preceding
rules.
§323. General
direction on
this subject.
§324. Every
nation is
bound to give
satisfaction
respecting the
just complaints
of another.
§325. How
nations may
abandon their
rights and just
complaints.


chapter xviii
449
but himself alone, he may indulge in the pleasure which he derivesfrom
doing good, and gratify his love of peace and quiet. The representative
of a nation, the sovereign, must not consult his own gratiﬁcation, or
suffer himself to be guided by his private inclinations. All his actions
must be directed to the greatest advantage of the state, combined with
the general interests of mankind, from which itis inseparable.Itbehoves
the prince, on every occasion, wisely to consider, and ﬁrmly to execute,
whatever is most salutary to the state, most conformable to the duties
of the nation towards other states,—and, at the same time, to consult
justice, equity, humanity, sound policy, and prudence. The rights of the
nation are a property of which the sovereign is only the trustee; and he
ought not to dispose of them in any other manner than he has reason
to presume the nation herself would dispose of them. And as to injuries,
it is often laudable in a citizen generously to pardon them: he lives under
the protection of the laws; the magistrates are capable of defending or
avenging him against those ungrateful or unprincipled wretches whom
his indulgence might encourage to a repetition of the offence. A nation
has not the same security: it is seldom safe for her to overlook or forgive
an injury, unless she evidently possess sufﬁcient power to crush the rash
aggressor who has dared to offend her. In such a case, indeed, it will
reﬂect glory on her, to pardon those who acknowledge their faults,—
Parcere subjectis, et debellare superbos; 88
and she may do it with safety. But between powers that are nearly equal,
the endurance of an injury without insisting on <276> complete satis-
faction for it, is almost always imputed to weakness or cowardice, and
seldom fails long to subject the injured party to further wrongs of amore
atrocious nature. Why do we often see the very reverse of this conduct
pursued by those who fancy themselves possessed of souls so highly ex-
alted above the level of the rest of mankind? Scarcely can they receive
concessions sufﬁciently humble from weaker states who have had the
misfortune to offend them: but to those whom they would ﬁnd it dan-
gerous to punish, they behave with greater moderation.
88. “To spare the vanquished and subdue the arrogant.” Virgil, Aeneid VI.853.

450
book ii: nations in relation to other states
If neither of the nations who are engaged in a dispute thinks proper
to abandon her right or her pretensions, the contending parties are, by
the law of nature, which recommends peace, concord, and charity,
bound to try the gentlest methods of terminating their differences.
These are,—ﬁrst, an amicable accommodation.—Let each party coolly
and candidly examine the subject of the dispute, and do justice to the
other; or let him whose right is too uncertain, voluntarily renounce it.
There are even occasions when it may be proper for him who has the
clearer right, to renounce it, for the sake of preserving peace,—occa-
sions, which it is the part of prudence to discover. To renounce a right
in this manner, is not abandoning or neglecting it. People are under no
obligation to you for what you abandon: but you gain a friend in the
party to whom you amicably yield up what was the subject of a dispute.
Compromise is a second method of bringing disputes to a peaceable
termination. It is an agreement, by which, without precisely deciding
on the justice of the jarring pretensions, the parties recede on bothsides,
and determine what shareeach shall haveof thethingindispute,oragree
to give it entirely to one of the claimants on condition of certain in-
demniﬁcations granted to the other.
Mediation, in which a common friend interposes his good ofﬁces,
frequently proves efﬁcacious in engaging the contending parties to meet
each other half-way,—to come to a good understanding,—to enter into
an agreement or compromise respecting their rights,—and, if the ques-
tion relates to an injury, to offer and accept a reasonablesatisfaction.The
ofﬁce of mediator requires as great a degree of integrity, as of prudence
and address. He ought to observe a strict impartiality; he should soften
the reproaches of the disputants, calm their resentments, and dispose
their minds to a reconciliation. His duty is to favour well-founded
claims, and to effect the restoration, to each party, of what belongs to
him: but he ought not scrupulously to insist on rigid justice. He is a
conciliator, and not a judge: his business is to procure peace; and he
ought to induce him who has right on his side to relax something of his
pretensions, if necessary, with a view to so great a blessing.
The mediator is not guarantee for the treaty which he has conducted,
unless he has expressly undertaken to guarantee it. That is an engage-
§326. Means
suggested by
the law of
nature, for
terminating
their disputes.
1. Amicable
accommo-
dation.
§327.
2. Compromise.
§328.
3. Mediation.


chapter xviii
451
ment of too great consequence to be imposed <277> on any one, with-
out his own consent clearly manifested. At present, when the affairs of
the sovereigns of Europe are so connected, that each has an eye on what
passes between those who are the most distant, mediation is a mode of
conciliation much used. Does any dispute arise? The friendly powers,
those who are afraid of seeing the ﬂames of war kindled, offer their me-
diation, and make overtures of peace and accommodation.
When sovereigns cannot agree about their pretensions, and arenever-
theless desirous of preserving or restoring peace, they sometimes sub-
mit the decision of their disputes to arbitrators chosen by common
agreement. When once the contending parties have entered into articles
of arbitration, they are bound to abide by the sentenceof thearbitrators:
they have engaged to do this; and the faith of treaties should be reli-
giously observed.
If, however, the arbitrators, by pronouncing a sentence evidently un-
just and unreasonable, should forfeit the character with which they were
invested, their judgment would deserve no attention: the parties had
appealed to it only with a view to the decision of doubtful questions.
Suppose a board of arbitrators should, by way of reparation for some
offence, condemn a sovereign state to become subject to the state she
has offended, will any man of sense assert that she is bound to submit
to such decision? If the injustice is of small consequence, it should be
borne for the sake of peace; and if it is not absolutely evident, we ought
to endure it, as an evil to which we have voluntarily exposed ourselves.
For if it were necessary that we should be convinced of the justice of a
sentence before we would submit to it, it would be of very little use to
appoint arbitrators.
There is no reason to apprehend, that, by allowing thepartiesaliberty
of refusing to submit to a manifestly unjust and unreasonable sentence,
we should render arbitration useless: our decision is by no means re-
pugnant to the nature of recognisances or arbitration articles. Therecan
be no difﬁculty in the affair, except in case of the parties having signed
vague and unlimited articles, in which they have not precisely speciﬁed
the subject of the dispute, or marked the bounds of their opposite pre-
tensions. It may then happen, as in the example just alleged, that the
§329.
4. Arbitration.


452
book ii: nations in relation to other states
arbitrators will exceed their power, and pronounce on what has not been
really submitted to their decision. Being called in to determine what
satisfaction a state ought to make for an offence, they may condemn her
to become subject to the state she has offended. But she certainly never
gave them so extensive a power; and their absurd sentenceisnotbinding.
In order to obviate all difﬁculty, and cut off every pretext of whichfraud
might make a handle, it is necessary that the arbitration articles should
precisely specify the subject in dispute, the respective and opposite pre-
tensions of the parties, the demands of the one, and the objections of
the other. These constitute the whole of what is submitted to the de-
cision of the arbitrators; and it is upon <278> these points alone that
the parties promise to abide by their judgment. If then their sentence
be conﬁned within these precise bounds, the disputants must acquiesce
in it. They cannot say that it is manifestly unjust, since it is pronounced
on a question which they have themselves rendered doubtful by the dis-
cordance of their claims, and which has been referred, as such, to the
decision of the arbitrators. Before they can pretend to evade such a sen-
tence, they should prove, by incontestable facts, that it was the offspring
of corruption or ﬂagrant partiality.
Arbitration is a very reasonable mode, and one that is perfectly con-
formable to the law of nature, for the decision of every dispute which
does not directly interest the safety of the nation. Though the claim of
justice may be mistaken by the arbitrators, it is still more to be feared
that it will be overpowered in an appeal to the sword. The Swiss have
had the precaution, in all their alliances among themselves, and even in
those they have contracted with the neighbouring powers, to agree
before-hand on the manner in which their disputes were tobe submitted
to arbitrators, in case they could not adjust them in an amicable manner.
This wise precaution has nota littlecontributedtomaintaintheHelvetic
republic in that ﬂourishing state which secures her liberty, and renders
her respectable throughout Europe.
In order to put in practice any of these methods, it is necessary to
speak with each other, and to confer together. Conferences and con-
gresses are therefore a mode of conciliation, which the law of nature
recommends to nations, as well calculated to bring their differences to
§330. Confer-
ences and
congresses.


chapter xviii
453
an amicable termination. Congresses are assemblies of plenipotentiaries
appointed to ﬁnd out means of conciliation, and to discuss and adjust
the reciprocal pretensions of the contending parties. To afford the pros-
pect of a happy issue of their deliberations, such meetings should be
formed and directed by a sincere desire of peace and concord. In the
present century, Europe has witnessed two general congresses,—that of
Cambray,* and that of Soissons,†—both tedious farces acted on the po-
litical theatre, in which the principal performers were less desirous of
coming to an accommodation than of appearing to desire it.
In order at present to ascertain in what manner and how far a nation
is bound to resort or accede to these various modes of accommodation,
and which of them she ought to prefer, it becomes necessary, in the ﬁrst
place, to distinguish between cases that are evident, and those that are
doubtful. Does the question relate to a right that is clear, certain, and
incontestable? A sovereign, if he possesses sufﬁcient strength, may per-
emptorily prosecute and defend that right, without exposing it to the
doubtful issue of an arbitration. Shall he submit to negotiate and com-
pound for a thing that evidently belongs to him, and which is disputed
with-<279>out the least shadow of justice? Much less will he subject it
to arbitration. But he ought not to neglect those methods of concilia-
tion, which, without endangering his own right, may induce his op-
ponent to listen to reason,—such as mediation and conferences.Nature
gives us no right to have recourse to forcible means, except where gentle
and paciﬁc methods prove ineffectual. It is not permitted to be so in-
ﬂexible in uncertain and doubtful questions. Who will dare to insist that
another shall immediately, and without examination, relinquish to him
a disputable right? This would be a means of rendering wars perpetual
and inevitable. Both the contending parties may be equally convinced
of the justice of their claims: why, therefore, should either yield to the
other? In such a case, they can only demand an examination of theques-
tion, propose a conference or an arbitration, or offer to settle the point
by articles of agreement.
* In 1724.
† In 1728.
§331. Distinc-
tion to be
made between
evident and
doubtful cases.


454
book ii: nations in relation to other states
In the disputes that arise between sovereigns, it is moreover neces-
sary to make a proper distinction between essential rights and rights of
inferior importance: for, according to the difference in the two cases,
a different line of conduct is to be pursued. A nation is under many
obligations of duty towards herself, towards othernations,andtowards
the great society of mankind. We know that the duties we owe to our-
selves are, generally speaking, paramount to those we owe to others:
but this is to be understood only of such duties as bearsomeproportion
to each other. We cannot refuse, in some degree, to forget ourselves
with respect to interests that are not essential, and to make some sac-
riﬁces, in order to assist other persons, and especially for the greater
beneﬁt of human society: and let us even remark, that we are invited
by our own advantage, by our own safety, to make these generous sac-
riﬁces; for the private good of each is intimately connected with the
general happiness. What idea should we entertain of a prince or a na-
tion who would refuse to give up the smallest advantage for the sake
of procuring to the world the inestimable blessings of peace? Every
power therefore owes this respect to the happiness of human society,
to shew himself open to every mode of conciliation, in questions re-
lating to interests which are neither essential nor of great importance.
If he exposes himself to the loss of something by an accommodation,
by a compromise, or by an arbitration, he ought to be sensible what
are the dangers, the evils, the calamities of war, and to consider that
peace is well worth a small sacriﬁce.
But if any one would rob a nation of one of her essential rights, or
a right without which she could not hope to support her national exis-
tence,—if an ambitious neighbour threatens the liberty of a republic,—
if he attempts to subjugate and enslave her,—she will take counsel only
from her own courage. She will not even attempt the mode of confer-
ences on so odious a pretension: she will, in such a quarrel, exert her
utmost efforts, exhaust every <280> resource, and gloriously lavish her
blood to the last drop if necessary. To listen to the smallest proposition,
is putting every thing to the risk. On such an occasion she may truly
say—
§332. Of
essential
rights, and
those of less
importance.


chapter xviii
455
Una salus ——— nullam sperare salutem: 89
and if fortune prove unfavourable, a free people will prefer death to ser-
vitude. What would have become of Rome, had she listened to timid
counsels, when Hannibal was encamped before her walls? The Swiss,
ever so ready to embrace paciﬁc measures or submit to legal decisions in
disputes respecting less essential points, have uniformly spurned at all
idea of compromise with those who harboured designs against their lib-
erty. They even refused on such occasions to submit their disputes to
arbitration, or to the judgment of the emperors.*
In doubtful causes which do not involve essential points, if one of
the parties will not accede either to a conference, an accommodation, a
compromise, or an arbitration, the other has only the last resource for
the defence of himself and his rights,—an appeal to the sword; and he
has justice on his side in taking up arms against so untractable an ad-
versary. For, in a doubtful cause, we can only demand all the reasonable
methods of elucidating the question, and of deciding or accommodat-
ing the dispute (§331).
But let us never lose sight of what a nation owes to her own security,
nor of that prudence by which she ought constantly to be directed. To
authorise her to have recourse to arms, it is not always necessary that
every conciliatory measure be ﬁrst expressly rejected: it is sufﬁcient that
she have every reason to believe that the enemy would not enter into
those measures with sincerity,—that they could not be brought to ter-
minate in a happy result,—and that the intervening delay would only
expose her to a greater danger of being overpowered. This maxim is
incontestable; but its application in practice is very delicate. A sovereign
* When, in the year 1355, they submitted their differences with the dukes of Aus-
tria, in relation to the countries of Zug and Glaris, to the arbitration of Charles IV.
it was not without this preliminary condition, that the emperor should not touch the
liberty of those countries, nor their alliance with the other cantons. Tschudi, p. 429,
&c.—Stettler, p. 77.—History of the Helvetic Confederacy, by De Watteville, book
iv. at the beginning.
89. “There is only one hope of safety [for the vanquished]—not to hope for any
well-being.” Virgil, Aeneid II, 354.
§333. How we
acquire a right
of having
recourse to
force in a
doubtful
cause,
§334. and
even without
attempting
other
measures.

456
book ii: nations in relation to other states
who would not be considered as a disturber of the public peace, will not
be induced abruptly to attack him who has not refused to accede to pa-
ciﬁc measures, unless he be able to justify his conduct in the eyes of all
mankind, by proving that he has reason to consider those peaceable ap-
pearances as an artiﬁce employed for the purpose of amusing him, and
taking him by surprise. To make his bare suspicions serve as sufﬁcient
authority for such a step, would be sapping every foundation on which
rests the security of nations.
The faith of one nation has ever been suspected by another, <281>
and sad experience but too plainly proves that this distrust is not ill-
founded. Independence and impunity are a touchstone that discovers
the alloy of the human heart: the private individual assumes the char-
acter of candour and probity; and, in default of the reality, his depen-
dence frequently obliges him to exhibit in his conduct at least the ap-
pearance of those virtues. The great man, who is independent, boasts
still more of them in his discourse; but as soon as he ﬁnds himself pos-
sessed of superior strength, he scarcely endeavours to save appearances,
unless his heart be moulded of materials which, unfortunately, are very
rare indeed: and if powerful interests intervene, he will give himself a
latitude in the pursuit of measures that would cover a private person
with shame and infamy. When, therefore,anationpretendsthatitwould
be dangerous for herto attemptpaciﬁcmeasures,shecanﬁndabundance
of pretexts to give a colour of justice to her precipitation in having re-
course to arms. And as, in virtue of the natural liberty of nations, each
one is free to judge in her own conscience how she ought to act, and has
a right to make her own judgment the sole guide of her conduct with
respect to her duties in every thing that is not determined by the perfect
rights of another (Prelim. §20), it belongs to each nation to judge
whether her situation will admit of paciﬁc measures, before she has re-
course to arms. Now, as the voluntary law of nations ordains, that, for
these reasons, we should esteem lawful whatever a nation thinks proper
to do in virtue of her natural liberty (Prelim. §21),bythatsamevoluntary
law, nations are bound to consider as lawful the conduct of that power
who suddenly takes up arms in a doubtful cause, and attempts to force
§335. Volun-
tary law of
nations on this
subject.


chapter xviii
457
his enemy to come to terms, withouthavingpreviouslytriedpaciﬁcmea-
sures. Louis XIV. was in the heart of the Netherlands before it was
known in Spain that he laid claim to the sovereignty of a part of those
rich provinces in right of the queen his wife. The king of Prussia, in
1741, published his manifesto in Silesia, at the head of sixty thousand
men. Those princes might have wise and just reasons for acting thus:
and this is sufﬁcient at the tribunal of the voluntary law of nations. But
a thing which that law tolerates through necessity, may be found very
unjust in itself: and a prince who puts it in practice, may render himself
very guilty in the sight of his own conscience, and very unjust towards
him whom he attacks, though he is not accountable for it to other na-
tions, as he cannot be accused of violating the general rules which they
are bound to observe towards each other. But if he abuses this liberty,
he gives all nations cause to hate and suspect him; he authorises them
to confederate against him; and thus, while he thinks he is promoting
his interests, he sometimes irretrievably ruins them.
A sovereign ought, in all his quarrels, to entertain a sincere desire of
rendering justice and preserving peace. He is bound, before he take up
arms, and also after having taken them up, to offer equitableconditions:
and then alone he is justiﬁable in ap-<282>pealing to the sword against
an obstinate enemy who refuses to listen to the voice of justice or equity.
It is the business of the appellant to prove his right; for he ought to
shew a good foundation for demanding a thing which he does not pos-
sess. He must have a title: and people are not obliged to respect that title
any fartherthanheshewsitsvalidity.Thepossessormaythereforeremain
in possession till proof be adduced to convince him that his possession
is unjust. As long as that remains undone, he has a right to maintain
himself in it, and even to recover it by force, if he has been despoiled
of it. Consequently it is not allowable to take up arms in order to obtain
possession of a thing to which the claimant has but an uncertain or
doubtful right. He is only justiﬁableincompellingthepossessor,byforce
of arms if necessary, to come to a discussion of the question, to accede
to some reasonable mode of decision or accommodation, or, ﬁnally, to
settle the point by articlesof agreementuponanequitablefooting(§333).
§336. Equi-
table condi-
tions to be
offered.
§337.
Possessor’s
right in doubt-
ful cases.


458
book ii: nations in relation to other states
If the subject of the dispute be an injury received, the offended party
ought to follow the rules we have just established. His own advantage,
and that of human society, require, that, previous to taking up arms, he
should try every paciﬁc mode of obtaining either a reparation of the
injury or a just satisfaction, unless there be substantial reasons to dis-
pense with his recurrence to such measures (§334). This moderation,this
circumspection, is the more becoming, and in general even indispens-
able, as the action which we look upon as an injury does not always
proceed from a design to offend us, and is sometimes rather a mistake,
than an act of malice. It even frequently happens that the injury is done
by inferior persons, without their sovereign having any share in it: and
on these occasions it is natural to presume that he will not refuse us a
just satisfaction. When some petty ofﬁcers, not long since, violated the
territory of Savoy in order to carry off from thence a noted smuggling
chief, the king of Sardinia90 caused his complaints to be laid before the
court of France; and Louis XV. thought it no derogation to his greatness
to send an embassador extraordinary to Turin to give satisfactionforthat
violence. Thus an affair of so delicate a nature was terminated in a man-
ner equally honourable to the two kings.
When a nation cannot obtain justice, whether for a wrong or an in-
jury, she has a right to do herself justice. But before she declare war (of
which we shall treat in the following book), there are various methods
practised among nations, which remain to be treated of here. Among
thosemethodsof obtainingsatisfaction,hasbeenreckonedwhatiscalled
the law of retaliation, according to which we make another suffer pre-
cisely as much evil as he has done. Many have extolled that law, as being
founded in the strictest justice:—and can we be surprised at their having
proposed it to princes, since they have presumed to make it a rule even
for the deity himself? The ancients called it the law of Rhadamanthus.
The idea is wholly derived from the obscure <283> and false notion
which represents evil as essentially and in its own nature worthy of pun-
ishment. We have shewn above (Book I. §169), what is the true origin
90. Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia, r. 1730–73.
§338. How
reparation of
an injury is to
be sought.
§339.
Retaliation.


chapter xviii
459
of the right of punishing;* whence we have deduced the true and just
proportion of penalties (Book I. §171). Let us say then, that a nationmay
punish another which has done her an injury, as we have shewn above
(see Chap. IV. and VI. of this Book), if the latter refuses to give her a
just satisfaction: but she has not a right to extend the penalty beyond
what her own safety requires. Retaliation, which is unjust between pri-
vate persons, would be much more so betweennations,becauseitwould,
in the latter case, be difﬁcult to make the punishment fall on those who
had done the injury. What right have you to cut off the nose and ears
of the embassador of a barbarian who had treated your embassador in
that manner? As to those reprisals in time of war which partake of the
nature of retaliation, they are justiﬁed on other principles; and we shall
speak of them in their proper place. The only truth in this idea of re-
taliation is, that, all circumstances being in other respectsequal,thepun-
ishment ought to bear some proportion to the evil for which we mean
to inﬂict it,—the very object and foundation of punishment requiring
thus much.
It is not always necessary to have recourse to arms, in order to punish
a nation. The offended party may, by way of punishment, deprive her
of the privileges she enjoyed in his dominions,—seize on some of her
property, if he has an opportunity,—and detain it till she has given him
sufﬁcient satisfaction.
When a sovereign is not satisﬁed with the manner in which his sub-
jectsaretreatedbythelawsandcustomsof anothernation,heisatliberty
todeclare thathewilltreatthesubjectsof thatnationinthesamemanner
as his are treated. This is what is called retortion. There is nothinginthis,
but what is conformable to justice and sound policy. No one can com-
plain on receiving the same treatment which he gives to others. Thusthe
king of Poland, elector of Saxony, enforces the law of escheatage only
against the subjects of those princes who make the Saxons liable to it.
This retortion may also take place with respect to certain regulations,of
* “Nam, ut Plato ait, nemo prudens punit quia peccatum est, sed, ne peccetur.”
[[“For, as Plato says, no one (who is) prudent punishes because of sin but to stop
sinning.”]] Seneca, de Ira [[I.XIX.7]].
§340. Various
modes of
punishing,
without having
recourse to
arms.
§341.
Retortion.


460
book ii: nations in relation to other states
which we have no right to complain, and which we are even obliged to
approve, though it is proper to guard against their effect, by imitating
them. Such are the orders relating to the importation or exportation of
certain commodities or merchandise. On the other hand, circumstances
frequently forbid us to have recourse to retortion. In this respect, each
nation may act according to the dictates of her own prudence.
Reprisals are used between nation and nation, in order to do them-
selves justice when they cannot otherwise obtain it. If a nation has taken
possession of what belongs to another,—if she refuses to pay a debt, to
repair an injury, or to give adequate satisfaction <284> for it,—thelatter
may seize something belonging to the former, and apply it to her own
advantage till she obtains payment of what is due to her, together with
interest and damages,—or keep it as a pledge till she has received ample
satisfaction. In the latter case, it is rather a stoppage or a seizure, than
reprisals: but they are frequently confounded in common language.The
effects thus seized on are preserved while there is any hope of obtaining
satisfaction or justice. As soon as that hope disappears, they are conﬁs-
cated, and then the reprisals are accomplished. If the two nations, upon
this ground of quarrel, come to an open rupture, satisfaction is consid-
ered as refused from the moment that war is declared or hostilities com-
menced; and then also the effects seized may be conﬁscated.
It is only upon evidently just grounds, or for a well-ascertained and
undeniable debt, that the law of nations allows us to make reprisals. For
he who advances a doubtful pretension, cannot in the ﬁrst instance de-
mand any thing more than an equitable examination of his right. In the
next place, before he proceed to such extremities, he should be able to
shew that he has ineffectually demanded justice, or at least that he has
every reason to think it would be in vain for him to demand it. Then
alone does it become lawful for him to take the matter into his own
hands, and do himself justice. It would be too inconsistent with the
peace, the repose, and the safety of nations, with their mutual com-
merce, and the duties which bind them to each other, that each one
should be authorised to have immediate recourse to violent measures,
without knowing whether there exist on the other side a disposition to
do her justice, or to refuse it.
§342.
Reprisals.
§343. What
is required to
render them
lawful.


chapter xviii
461
But in order perfectly to understand this article, it must be observed,
that if, in a disputable case, our adversary either refuses to pursue or
artfully evades the necessary steps for bringing the mattertotheproof,—
if he does not candidly and sincerely accede to some paciﬁc mode of
terminatingthedispute,—especiallyif heisforemostinadoptingviolent
measures,—he gives justice to our cause which beforewasproblematical:
we may then have recourse to reprisals, or the seizure of his effects, in
order to compel him to embrace the methods of conciliation which the
law of nature prescribes. This is the last remaining effort previous to a
commencement of open hostilities.
We have observed above (§81), that the wealth of the citizens consti-
tutes a part of the aggregate wealth of a nation,—that, between state
and state, the privateproperty of themembersisconsideredasbelonging
to the body, and is answerable for the debts of that body (§82): whence
it follows, that in reprisals we seize on the property of the subject just
as we would on that of the state or sovereign. Every thing that belongs
to the nation is subject to reprisals, whenever it can be seized, provided
it be not a deposit intrusted to the public faith. As it is only in conse-
quence of that conﬁdence which the proprietor has placed in our good-
faith, that we happen to have such deposit in our <285> hands, it ought
to be respected, even in case of open war. Such is the conduct observed
in France, England, and elsewhere, with respect to the money which
foreigners have placed in the public funds.
He who makes reprisals against a nation, on the property of its mem-
bers indiscriminately, cannot be taxed with seizing the property of an
innocent person for the debt of another: for in this case the sovereign is
to compensate those of his subjects on whom the reprisals fall; it is a
debt of the state or nation, of which each citizen ought only to pay his
quota.*
* On the subject of reprisals, it is necessary to observe, that when we adopt that
expedient as being a gentler mode of proceeding than that of war, the reprisalsought
not to be general. The grand pensionary De Witt [[Johan de Witt (1625–72), Dutch
statesman]] very properly remarked—“I do not see any difference between general
reprisals and open war.” [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§344. Upon
what effects
reprisals are
made.
§345. The
state ought to
compensate
those who
suffer by
reprisals.

462
book ii: nations in relation to other states
It is only between state and state that all the property of the individ-
uals is considered as belonging to the nation. Sovereigns transact their
affairs between themselves; they carry on business with each other di-
rectly, and can only consider a foreign nation as a society of men who
have but one common interest. It belongs therefore to sovereigns alone
to make and order reprisals on the footing we have just described. Be-
sides, this violent measure approaches very near to an open rupture, and
is frequently followed by one. It is therefore an affair of too serious a
nature to be left to the discretion of private individuals.Andaccordingly
we see, that, in every civilised state, a subject who thinks himself injured
by a foreign nation, has recourse to his sovereign in order to obtain per-
mission to make reprisals. This is what the French call applyingforletters
of marque.
We may make reprisals against a nation not only for the actions of
the sovereign, but also for those of his subjects: and this may take place
when the state or the sovereign participates in the act of his subject, and
takes it upon himself; which he may do in several ways, as we haveshewn
in Chap. VI. of this Book.
In the same manner the sovereign demandsjustice,ormakesreprisals,
not only for his own concerns, but also for those of his subjects, whom
he is bound to protect, and whose cause is that of the nation.
But to grant reprisals against a nation in favour of foreigners, is to set
himself up as judge between that nation and those foreigners; which no
sovereign has a right to do. The cause of reprisals ought to be just: they
ought even to be grounded on a denial of justice,—either an actual de-
nial, or one which there is good reason to apprehend (§343). Now what
right have we to judge whether the complaint of a stranger against an
independent state is just, if he has really been denied justice? If it be
objected, that we may espouse the quarrel of another state in a war that
appears to us to be just,—to assist her, and even to unite with her,—the
case is different. In granting succours against a nation, we do not detain
her property or her people that happen to be within our territoriesunder
the public faith; and in declaring war against her, we suffer her to with-
draw her subjects and her <286> effects, as will hereafter appear. In the
§346. The
sovereign
alone can
order reprisals.
§347. Repri-
sals against a
nation for
actions of its
subjects, and
in favour of
the injured
subjects.
§348. But not
in favour of
foreigners.
chapter xviii
463
case of reprisals granted to our own subjects, a nation cannotcomplain
that we violate the public faith in seizing on her people or her property;
because we are under no other obligation to grant security to that prop-
erty and those people, than what arises from a reasonable supposition
that their nation will not in the ﬁrst instance violate, with respect to us
or our subjects, the rules of justice which nations ought to observe
towards each other. If she violate them, we have a right to obtain sat-
isfaction; and the mode of reprisals is more easy, safe, and mild, than
that of war. We cannot urge the same arguments in justiﬁcation of
reprisals ordered in favour of foreigners. For the security we owe to the
subjects of a foreign power does not depend, as a condition, on the
security which that power shall grant to all other nations, to people
who do not belong to us, and are not under our protection. England
having, in 1662, granted reprisals against the United Provinces, in fa-
vour of the knights of Malta,* the states of Holland asserted withgood
reason, that, according to the law of nations, reprisals can only be
granted to maintain the rights of thestate, andnotforanaffairinwhich
the nation has no concern.†
* On that subject, the grand pensionary De Witt wrote as follows—“Nothingcan
be more absurd than that grant of reprisals: for—to say nothing of its proceeding
from a board of admiralty who have no power to grant it without infringing on the
sovereign authority of their prince—it is evident that no sovereign can grant or make
reprisals, except for the defence or indemniﬁcation of his own subjects, whom he is,
in the sight of God, bound to protect: but he can never grant reprisals in favour of
any foreigner who is not under his protection, and with whose sovereign he has not
any engagement to that effect, ex pacto vel foedere. Besides, it is certain that reprisals
ought not to be granted except in case of an open denial of justice. Finally, it is also
evident, that, even in case of a denial of justice, he cannot empower his subjects to
make reprisals, until he has repeatedly demanded justice for them, and added, that,
in the event of a refusal, he will be obliged to grant them letters of marque and
reprisal.”—From the answers of Mr.Boreel, it appearsthatthisconductof theBritish
admiralty was strongly condemned by the court of France. The king of England
testiﬁed his disapprobation of it, and gave orders for the release of the Dutch vessels
whose seizure had been permitted by way of reprisal. [[Note added in 1773/1797
editions.]]
† See Bynckershock’s Competent Judge of Embassadors, chap. xxii. §5.


464
book ii: nations in relation to other states
The individuals who by their actions have given cause for just repri-
sals, are bound to indemnify those on whom they fall; and the sovereign
ought to compel them to do it. For we are under an obligation to repair
the damage we have occasioned by our own fault. And although the
sovereign, by refusing justice to the offended party, has brought on the
reprisals against his subjects, those who were the ﬁrst cause of them do
not become the less guilty: the fault of the sovereign does not exempt
them from repairing the consequences of theirs. However, if they were
ready to give satisfaction to the party whom they had injured or of-
fended, and their sovereign has prevented their doing it, they are not
bound to do any thing more in that case, than they would before have
been obliged to do in order to prevent the reprisals; and it is the sover-
eign’s duty to repair the additional damage, which is the consequence
of his own fault (§345). <287>
We have said (§343) that we ought not to make reprisals, except when
we are unable to obtain justice. Now justice is refused in several ways:—
First, by a denial of justice, properly so called, or by a refusal to hear
your complaints or those of your subjects, or to admit them to establish
their right before the ordinary tribunals. Secondly, by studied delays, for
which no good reasons can be given,—delays equivalent to a refusal, or
still more ruinous. Thirdly, by an evidently unjust and partial decision.
But it is necessary that this injustice should be manifest and palpable.
In all cases susceptible of doubt, a sovereign ought not to listen to the
complaints of his subjects against a foreign tribunal, nor to attempt to
screen them from the effects of a sentence passed in due form: for that
would be the means of exciting continual troubles. The law of nations
directs that states should reciprocally pay that kind of deference to each
other’s jurisdiction, for the same reason as the civil law ordains within
the state that every deﬁnitive sentence, passed in due form, shall be es-
teemed just. Between nation and nation, the obligation is neither so ex-
press nor so extensive: but it cannot be denied, that it is highlyconducive
to their peace, and conformable to their duties towards human society,
to oblige their subjects, in all doubtful cases, and unless where there is
a manifest wrong done to them, to submit to the sentences of theforeign
tribunals before which their causes have been tried. (See above §84.)
§349. Those
who have
given cause for
reprisals ought
to indemnify
those who
suffer by them.
§350. What
may be
deemed a
refusal to
do justice.


chapter xviii
465
As we may seize the things which belong to a nation, in order to com-
pel her to do justice, we may equally, for the same reason, arrest some
of her citizens, and not release them till wehavereceivedfullsatisfaction.
This is what the Greeks called Androle´psia.* At Athens the lawpermitted
the relatives of him who had been assassinated in a foreign country, to
seize three of the inhabitants of that country, and to detain them till the
murderer was punished or delivered up.† But in the practice of modern
Europe, this method is seldom resorted to, except with a view to obtain
satisfaction for an injury of the same nature,—that is to say, to compel
a sovereign to release a person whom he detains unjustly.
The persons, however, who are thus arrested, being detained only as
a security or pledge in order to oblige a nation to do justice,—if their
sovereign obstinately persists in refusing it, we cannot take away their
lives, or inﬂict any corporal punishment upon them, for a refusal, of
which they are not guilty. Their property, their liberty itself, may be
staked for the debts of the state; but not their lives, of which man has
not the power of disposing. A sovereign has no right to put to death the
subjects of a state which has done him an injury, except when they are
engaged in war; and we shall see elsewhere, what it is that gives him that
right. <288>
But the sovereign is authorised toemployforciblemeansagainstthose
who resist him in the exertion of his right, and to pursue such means as
far as is necessary to overcome their unjust resistance. It is therefore law-
ful to repel those who undertake to oppose the making of just reprisals:
and if, for that purpose, it be necessary to proceed even so far as to put
them to death, the whole blame of that misfortune is imputable to their
unjust and inconsiderate resistance. In such a case, Grotius would have
us rather abstain from making reprisals.‡ Between private persons, and
for things that are not of the highest importance, it is certainly worthy,
not only of a christian, but, in general, of every man of principle,rather
to abandon his right than to kill the person who unjustly resists him.
* Androlhyia, seizure of men.
† Demosthenes, Orat. adv. Aristocrat.
‡ De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. iii. cap. ii. §6.
§351. Subjects
arrested by
way of
reprisals.
§352. Our
right against
those who
oppose
reprisals.


466
book ii: nations in relation to other states
But, between sovereigns, the case is otherwise. To suffer themselves to
be bullied, would be attended with consequences of tooseriousanature.
The true and just welfare of the state is the grand rule: moderation is
ever laudable in itself; but the conductors of nations ought to practise
that virtue so far only as it is consistent with the happiness and safety of
their people.
After having demonstrated the lawfulness of making reprisals when
we can no otherwise obtain justice, we may thence readily concludethat
a sovereign is not justiﬁable in making forcible opposition to, or waging
war against, the party, who, by ordering or making reprisals in such a
case, only exerts his just right.
And as the law of humanity directs nations as well as individuals ever
to prefer the gentlest measures when they are sufﬁcient to obtain jus-
tice,—whenever a sovereign can, by the mode of reprisals, procure a just
indemniﬁcation or a suitable satisfaction, he ought to conﬁne himself
to this method, which is less violent and less fatal than war. On this
subject, Icannotavoidnoticinganerrorwhichistoogeneraltobewholly
disregarded. If it happens that a prince, having reason to complain of
some injustice or some acts of hostility, and not ﬁnding his adversary
disposed to give him satisfaction, determines to make reprisals with the
view of endeavouring to compel him to listen to the voice of justice
before he proceeds to an open rupture,—if, withoutadeclarationof war,
he seizes on his effects, his shipping, and detains them as pledges,—you
hear certain men cry out that this is robbery. If that prince had at once
declared war, they would not have said a word; they would perhaps have
praised his conduct. Strange forgetfulness of reason, and of everysound
principle! Would we not, at this rate, be tempted to suppose thatnations
were bound to observe the laws of chivalry,—to challenge each other to
the lists,—and decide their quarrels like a pair of doughty champions
engaged in regular duel? It is the duty of sovereigns attentively to main-
tain the rights of their people, and to obtain justice by every lawful
means,—still, however, prefer-<289>ring the gentlest methods: and we
again repeat the assertion—it is evident that the mode of reprisals, of
which we are speaking, is inﬁnitely more gentle and less fatal than that
of war. But since, between powers whose strength is nearly equal, re-
§353. Just
reprisals do
not afford a
just cause
for war.
§354. How
we ought to
conﬁne
ourselves to
reprisals, or at
length proceed
to hostilities.


chapter xviii
467
prisals often lead to war, they ought not to be attempted except in the
last extremity. In such circumstances, the prince who has recoursetothat
expedient instead of proceeding to an open rupture, is undoubtedly en-
titled to praise for his moderation and prudence.
Those who run to arms without necessity, are the scourges of the
human race, barbarians, enemies to society, and rebellious violators of
the laws of nature, or rather the laws of the common fatherof mankind.
There are cases, however, in which reprisals would be justly condem-
nable, even when a declaration of war would not be so: and these are
precisely those cases in which nations may with justice take up arms.
When the question which constitutes the ground of a dispute, relates,
not to an act of violence, or an injury received, but to a contested
right,—after an ineffectual endeavour to obtain justice by conciliatory
and paciﬁc measures, it is a declaration of war that ought to follow, and
not pretended reprisals, which, in such a case, would only be real acts
of hostility without a declaration of war, and would be contrary to
public faith as well as to the mutual duties of nations. This will more
evidently appear, when we shall have explained the reasons which estab-
lish the obligation of declaring war previous to a commencement of
hostilities.*
But if, from particular conjunctures, and from the obstinacy of an
unjust adversary, neither reprisals, nor any of the methods of which we
have been treating, should prove sufﬁcient for our defence and for the
protection of our rights, there remains only the wretched and melan-
choly alternative of war, which will be the subject of the followingbook.
<290> <291>
* See book iii. chap. iv.



469
the
LAW
of
NATIONS
u
b o o k i i i
u
Of War
chapter i
Of War,—its different Kinds,—
and the Right of making War.
War is that state in which we prosecute our right by force. We also under-
stand, by this term, the act itself, or the manner of prosecuting our right
by force: but it is more conformable to general usage, and more proper
in a treatise on the law of war, to understand this term in the sense we
have annexed to it.
Public war is that which takes place between nations or sovereigns,
and which is carried on in the name of the public power, andbyitsorder.
This is the war we are here to consider:—private war, or that which is
carried on between private individuals, belongs to the law of nature
properly so called.
In treating of therighttosecurity(Book II.Chap. IV.)wehaveshewn
that nature gives men a right to employ force, when it is necessary for
their defence, and for the preservation of their rights. This principle is
generally acknowledged: reason demonstrates it; and nature herself has
§1. Deﬁni-
tion of war.
§2. Public war.
§3. Right of
making war.


470
book iii: of war
engraved it on the heart of man. Some fanatics indeed, taking in a literal
sense the moderation recommended in the gospel, have adopted the
strange fancy of suffering themselves to be massacred or plundered, ra-
<292>ther than oppose force to violence. But we need not fear that this
error will make any great progress. The generality of mankind will, of
themselves, guard against its contagion,—happy, if they as well knew
how to keep within the just bounds which nature has set to a right that
is granted only through necessity! To mark those just bounds,—and, by
the rules of justice, equity, and humanity, to moderate the exercise of
that harsh though too often necessary right,—is the intention of this
third book.
As nature has given men no right to employ force, unless when it
becomes necessary for self-defence and the preservation of their rights
(Book II. §49, &c.), the inference is manifest, that, since the establish-
ment of political societies, a right, so dangerous in its exercise, no longer
remains with private persons, except in those rencounters where society
cannot protect or defend them. In the bosom of society, the public au-
thority decides all the disputes of the citizens, represses violence, and
checks every attempt to do ourselves justice with our own hands. If a
private person intends to prosecute his right against the subject of a for-
eign power, he may apply to the sovereign of his adversary, or to the
magistrates invested with the public authority: and if he is denied justice
by them, he must have recourse to his own sovereign, who is obliged to
protect him. It would be too dangerous to allow every citizen the liberty
of doing himself justice against foreigners; as, in that case, there would
not be a single member of the state who might not involve it in war.
And how could peace be preserved between nations, if it were in the
power of every private individual to disturb it? A right of so momentous
a nature,—the right of judging whether the nation has real grounds of
complaint,—whether she is authorised to employ force, and justiﬁable
in taking up arms,—whether prudence will admit of such a step,—and
whether the welfare of the state requires it,—that right, I say, can belong
only to the body of the nation, or to the sovereign, her representative.
It is doubtless one of those rights, withoutwhichtherecanbenosalutary
government, and which are therefore called rights of majesty (Book I.
§45).
§4. It belongs
only to the
sovereign
power.


chapter i
471
Thus the sovereign power alone is possessed of authoritytomakewar.
But as the differentrights whichconstitutethispower,originallyresident
in the body of the nation, may be separated or limited according to the
will of the nation (Book I. §§31 and 45), it is from the particular con-
stitution of each state, that we are to learn where the power resides, that
is authorised to make war in the name of the society at large. The kings
of England, whose power is in other respects so limited, have the right
of making war and peace.* Those of Sweden have lost it. The brilliant
but ruinous exploits of Charles XII.1 sufﬁci-<293>ently warranted the
states of that kingdom to reserve to themselves a right of such impor-
tance to their safety.
War is either defensive or offensive. He who takes up arms to repel the
attack of an enemy, carries on a defensive war. He who is foremost in
taking up arms, and attacks a nation that lived in peace with him, wages
offensive war. The object of a defensive war is very simple; it is no other
than self-defence: in that of offensive war, there is as great a variety as
in the multifarious concerns of nations: but, in general, it relates either
to the prosecution of some rights, or to safety. We attack a nation with
a view either to obtain something to which we lay claim, to punish her
for an injury she has done us, or to prevent one which she is preparing
to do, and thus avert a danger with which she seems to threaten us. I do
not here speak of the justice of war: that shall make the subject of a
particular chapter:—all I here propose is to indicate, in general, the vari-
ous objects for which a nation takes up arms,—objects which may fur-
nish lawful reasons, or unjust pretences, butwhichareatleastsusceptible
of a colour of right. I do not therefore, among the objects of offensive
war, set down conquest, or the desire of invading the property of oth-
ers:—views of that nature, destitute even of any reasonable pretext to
countenance them, do not constitute the object of regular warfare, but
of robbery, which we shall consider in its proper place.
* I here speak of the right considered in itself. But as a king of England cannot,
without the concurrence of parliament, either raise money or compel his subjects to
take up arms, his right of making war is, in fact, but a slender prerogative, unless the
parliament second him with supplies. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
1. Charles XII of Sweden, r. 1697–1718.
§5. Defensive
and offensive
war.


472
book iii: of war
chapter ii
Of the Instruments of War,—the raising
of Troops, &c.—their Commanders, or the
Subordinate Powers in War.
The sovereign is the real author of war, which is carried on in his name,
and by his order. The troops, ofﬁcers, soldiers, and, in general, all those
by whose agency the sovereign makes war, are only instruments in his
hands. They execute his will and not their own. The arms, and all the
apparatus of things used in war, are instruments of an inferior order.
For the decision of questions that will occur in the sequel, it is of im-
portance to determine precisely what are the things which belongtowar.
Without entering here into a minute detail, we shall only observe that
whatever is peculiarly used in waging war, is to be classed among the
instruments of war; and things which are equally used at all times, such
as provisions, belong to peace, unless it be in certain particularjunctures
when those things appear to be specially destined for the support of war.
Arms of all kinds, artillery, gun-powder, salt-petre and sulphur of which
it is composed, ladders, gabions, tools, and all other implements for
sieges, materials for building ships of war, tents, soldiers’ clothes, &c.
these always belong to war. <294>
As war cannot be carried on without soldiers, it is evident that who-
ever has the right of making war, has also naturally thatof raisingtroops.
The latter therefore belongs likewise to the sovereign (§4), and is one
of the prerogatives of majesty (Book I. §45). The power of levying
troops, or raising an army, is of too great consequence in a state, to be
intrusted to any other than the sovereign. The subordinate authorities
are not invested with it; they exercise it only by order or commission
from the sovereign. But it is not always necessary that they should have
an express order for the purpose. On those urgent exigencies which do
not allow time to wait for the supreme order, the governor of a prov-
ince, or the commandant of a town, may raise troops for the defence
of the town or province committed to their care; and this they do by
§6. Instru-
ments of war.
§7. Right of
levying troops.


chapter ii
473
virtue of the power tacitly given them by their commission in cases of
this nature.
I say that this important power is the appendage of sovereignty; it
makes a part of the supreme authority. But we have already seen that
those rights which together constitute the sovereign power, may be di-
vided (Book I. §§31, 45), if such be the will of the nation. It may then
happen that a nation does not intrust her chief with a right so dangerous
to her liberty as that of raising and supporting troops, or at least that she
limits the exercise of it, by making it depend on the consent of her rep-
resentatives. The king of England, who has the right of making war, has
also, indeed, that of granting commissions for raising troops; but he
cannot compel any person to enlist, nor, without the concurrence of
parliament, keep an army on foot.
Every citizen is bound to serve and defend the state as far as he is
capable. Society cannot otherwise be maintained; and this concurrence
for the common defence is one of the principal objects of every political
association. Every man capable of carrying arms should take them up
at the ﬁrst order of him who has the power of making war.2
In former times, and especially in small states, immediately on a dec-
laration of war, every man became a soldier; the whole community took
up arms, and engaged in the war. Soon after, a choice was made, and
armies were formed of picked men,—the remainder of the people pur-
suing their usual occupations. At present the use of regular troops is
almost every-where adopted, especially in powerful states. The public
authority raises soldiers, distributes them into different bodies underthe
command of generals and other ofﬁcers, and keeps them on foot as long
as it thinks necessary. As every citizen or subject is bound to serve the
state, the sovereign has a right, in case of necessity, to enlist whom he
pleases. But he ought to choose such only as are ﬁt for the occupation
of war; and it is highly proper that he should, as far as possible, conﬁne
his choice to volunteers, who enlist without compulsion.
2. This paragraph illustrates Vattel’s belief that to some extent all successful mon-
archies needed to learn lessons from republics. Another example canbefoundinbook
3, §50.
§8. Obligation
of the citizens
or subjects.
§9. Enlisting
or raising of
troops.

474
book iii: of war
No person is naturally exempt from taking up arms in defence of the
state,—the obligation of everymemberof societybeing<295>thesame.
Those alone are excepted, who are incapable of handling arms, or sup-
porting the fatigues of war. This is the reason why old men, children,
and women, are exempted. Although there be some women who are
equal to men in strength and courage, yet such instances are not usual;
and rules must necessarily be general, and derived from the ordinary
course of things. Besides, women are necessary for other services in so-
ciety; and, in short, the mixture of both sexes in armies would be at-
tended with too many inconveniences.
A good government should, as far as possible, so employ all the cit-
izens, and distribute posts and employments in such manner, that the
state may be the most effectually served in all its affairs. Therefore,when
not urged by necessity, it should exempt from military service all those
who are employed in stations useful or necessary to society. Upon this
ground, magistrates are usually exempted,—their whole time not being
too much for the administration of justice, and the maintenance of
order.
The clergy cannot naturally, and as matter of right, arrogate to them-
selves any peculiar exemption. To defend one’s country, is an action not
unworthy of the most sacred hands. That article of the canon law which
forbids ecclesiastics to shed blood, is a convenient device to exemptfrom
personal danger those men who are often so zealous to fan the ﬂame of
discord and excite bloody wars. Indeed, for the same reasons which we
have above alleged in favour of magistrates, an exemption from bearing
arms should be allowed to such of the clergy as are really useful,—to
those who are employed in teaching religion, governing the church, and
celebrating the public worship.*
* Formerly bishops went to war in virtue of their ﬁefs, and led with them their
vassals. The Danish bishops were not inattentive to a function which pleased them
better than the peaceful cares of episcopacy. The famous Absalom, bishop of Ros-
child, and afterwards archbishop of Lunden, was the principal general of king Wal-
demar I [[r. 1157–82]]. And since the use of regular troops has superseded that feudal
service, there have not been wanting some martial prelates, who eagerly courted the
command of armies. The cardinal De la Valette, and Sourdis archbishop of Bour-
§10. Whether
there be any
exemptions
from carrying
arms.


chapter ii
475
But those immense multitudes of useless monks and friars,—those
drones, who, under pretence of dedicating themselves to God, dedicate
themselves in fact to sloth and effeminacy,—by what right do they pre-
tend to a prerogative that is ruinous to the state? And if the prince ex-
empts them frommilitaryservice,ishenotguiltyof injusticetotheother
members, on whom he thus throws the whole burthen? I do not here
mean to advise a sovereign to ﬁll his armies with monks, but gradually
to diminish a useless class of men, by depriving them of injurious and
ill-<296>founded privileges. History mentions a martial bishop* whose
weapon was a club, with which he knocked down the enemy, to avoid
incurringthecensureof thecanon-lawbysheddingtheirblood.Itwould
be much more reasonable, when monks are exempted from carrying
arms, that they should be employed in the works as pioneers, and thus
made to alleviate the toil of the soldiers. They have on many occasions
zealously undertaken the task in cases of necessity. Icouldmentionmore
than one famous siege, where monks have usefully served in defence of
their country. When the Turks besieged Malta, the ecclesiastics, the
women, the very children, all, according to their respective strength or
capacity, contributed to that glorious defence which bafﬂed the utmost
efforts of the Ottoman empire.
There is another class of idle drones, whose exemption is a still more
glaring abuse,—I mean those swarms of useless footmen who crowd the
dwellings of the great and the wealthy,—and who, by the very nature
of their employment, are themselves corrupted in displaying the luxury
of their masters.
deaux, appeared in arms under the ministry of cardinal Richelieu, who also acted
himself in a military capacity, at the attack of the pass of Susa. This is an abuse which
the church very justly opposes. A bishop makes a better appearance in his proper
station in his diocese, than in the army; and, at present, sovereigns are in no want of
generals and ofﬁcers, who will perform more useful services than can be expected
from churchmen. In short, let every person keep to his vocation. All I dispute with
the clergy is their exemption as matter of right, and in cases of necessity.
* A bishop of Beauvais, under Philip Augustus [[Philippe II of France, r. 1180–
1223]]. He fought at the battle of Bouvines [[Bovines, 1214]].


476
book iii: of war
Among the Romans, while every citizen took his turn to serve in the
army, their service was gratuitous. But when a choice is made, andstand-
ing armies are kept on foot, the state is bound to pay them, as no indi-
vidual is under an obligation to perform more than his quota of the
public service: and if the ordinary revenues are not sufﬁcient for the
purpose, the deﬁciency must be provided for by taxation. It is but rea-
sonable that those who do not serve should pay their defenders.
When the soldier is not in the ﬁeld, he must necessarily be provided
with quarters. The burthen, in such case, naturally falls on house-
keepers: but as that is attended with many inconveniences, and proves
very distressing to the citizens, it becomes a good prince, or a wise and
equitable government, to ease them of it as far as possible. In this par-
ticular, the king of France has made magniﬁcent and ample provision
in many towns, by the erection of barracks for the accommodation of
the garrison.
The asylums prepared forindigentsoldiersandofﬁcerswhoaregrown
grey in the service, and whom toil or the enemy’s sword has rendered
incapable of providing for their own subsistence, may be considered as
part of the military pay. In France and England, magniﬁcent establish-
ments have been made in favour of invalids, which, while theydischarge
a debt of a sacred nature, do honour to the sovereign and the nation.
The care of those unfortunate victims of war is the indispensable duty
of every state, in proportion to its ability. It is repugnant, not only to
humanity, but to the strictest justice, that generous citizens, heroes who
have shed their blood for the safety of their country, should be left to
perish with want, or unworthily forced to beg their bread. The hon-
ourable maintenance of such persons might <297> very properly be im-
posed upon rich convents, and largeecclesiasticalbeneﬁces.Nothingcan
be more just than that those citizens who avoid all the dangers of war,
should bestow part of their riches fortherelief of theirvaliantdefenders.
Mercenary soldiers are foreigners voluntarily engaging to serve the
state for money, or a stipulated pay. As they owe no service to a sovereign
whose subjects they are not, the advantages he offers them are their sole
motive. By enlisting they incur the obligation to serve him; and the
prince on his part promises them certain conditions which are settled in
§11. Soldiers’
pay and
quarters.
§12. Hospitals
for invalids.
§13. Merce-
nary soldiers.


chapter xv
Of the Right of private Persons in War.
Sect. 223. Subjects cannot commit hostilities without
the sovereign’s order,
page 399
224. That order may be general or particular,
399
225. Source of the necessity of such an order,
399
226. Why the law of nations should have adopted this
rule, <xlix>
399
227. Precise meaning of the order,
400
228. What may be undertaken by private persons,
presuming on the sovereign’s will,
400
229. Privateers,
400
230. Volunteers,
401
231. What soldiers and subalterns may do,
401
232. Whether the state is bound to indemnify the
subjects for damages sustained in war,
402
chapter xvi
Of various Conventions made during the
Course of the War.
233. Truce and suspension of arms,
404
234. does not terminate the war,
404
235. A truce is either partial or general,
404
236. General truce for many years,
404
237. By whom those agreements may be concluded,
405
238. The sovereign’s faith engaged in them,
406
239. When the truce begins to be obligatory,
406
240. Publication of the truce,
406
241. Subjects contravening the truce,
406
242. Violation of the truce,
407
243. Stipulation of a penalty against the infractor,
407
244. Time of the truce,
407
245. Effects of a truce:—what is allowed, or not,
during its continuance.—First rule—Each party
may do at home what they have a right to do in
time of peace,
408
246. Second rule—Not to take advantage of the truce
in doing what hostilities would have prevented,
409
247. for instance, continuing the works of a siege, or
repairing breaches,
409


58
original contents
Sect. 248. or introducing succours,
page 409
249. Distinction of a particular case,
410
250. Retreat of an army during a suspension
of hostilities,
410
251. Third rule—Nothing to be attempted in contested
places, but every thing to be left as it was,
411
252. Places quitted or neglected by the enemy,
411
253. Subjects inclined to revolt against their prince not
to be received during the truce,
411
254. much less to be solicited to treason,
411
255. Persons or effects of enemies not to be seized
during the truce,
411
256. Right of postliminium during the truce,
411
257. Intercourse allowed during a truce,
411
258. Persons detained by unsurmountable obstacles
after the expiration of the truce,
412
259. Particular conditions added to truces,
412
260. At the expiration of the truce, the war
recommences without any new declaration,
412
261. Capitulations; and by whom they may be
concluded, <l>
412
262. Clauses contained in them,
413
263. Observance of capitulations, and its utility,
414
264. Promises made to the enemy by individuals,
414
chapter xvii
Of Safe-conducts and Passports,—with Questions on
the Ransom of Prisoners of War.
265. Nature of safe-conducts and passports,
416
266. From what authority they emanate,
416
267. Not transferable from one person to another,
416
268. Extent of the promised security,
416
269. How to judge of the right derived from a
safe-conduct,
417
270. Whether it includes baggage and domestics,
417
271. Safe-conduct granted to the father does not
include his family,
417
272. Safe-conduct given in general to any one and
his retinue,
417
273. Term of the safe-conduct,
418
274. A person unavoidably detained beyond the term,
418


original contents
59
Sect. 275. The safe-conduct does not expire at the
death of him who gave it,
page 418
276. How it may be revoked,
418
277. Safe-conduct, with the clause, “for such time as
we shall “think ﬁt,”
418
278. Conventions relating to the ransom of prisoners,
419
279. The right of demanding a ransom may
be transferred,
419
280. What may annul the convention made for the rate
of the ransom,
419
281. A prisoner dying before payment of ransom,
419
282. Prisoner released on condition of procuring the
release of another,
420
283. Prisoner retaken before he has paid his
former ransom,
420
284. Prisoner rescued before he has received his liberty,
420
285. Whether the things which a prisoner has found
means to conceal, belong to him,
421
286. Hostage given for the release of a prisoner,
421
chapter xviii
Of Civil War.
287. Foundation of the sovereign’s rights against
the rebels,
421
288. Who are rebels,
422
289. Popular commotion, insurrection, sedition,
422
290. How the sovereign is to suppress them,
422
291. He is bound to perform the promises he has made
to the rebels,
423
292. Civil war,
424
293. A civil war produces two independent parties,
425
294. They are to observe the common laws of war,
425
295. The effects of civil war distinguished according
to cases,
426
296. Conduct to be pursued by foreign nations, <li>
427

60
original contents
book iv
Of the Restoration of Peace;
and of Embassies.
chapter ii
477
the articles of enlistment. Those articles, being the rule and measure of
the respective obligations and rights of the contracting parties, are to be
religiously observed. The complaints of some French historians against
the Swiss troops, who on several occasions formerly refused to march
against the enemy, and even withdrew from the service, because they
were not paid,—those complaints, I say, are equally ridiculous and un-
just. Why should the articles of enlistment be more strongly binding on
one of the parties than on the other? Whenever the prince fails to per-
form what he has promised, the foreign soldiers are discharged from any
further duty to him. I own it would be ungenerous to forsake a prince
who, without any fault on his own part, is, by accident alone, rendered
for a while unable to make good his payments. There may even be oc-
casions when such an inﬂexibility on the part of the soldier would be,
if not contrary to strict justice, at least very repugnant to equity. Butthis
was never the case with the Switzers:—they never were known to quit
the service on the ﬁrst failure of payment; and when they perceived the
good intentions of a sovereign labouring under a real inability to satisfy
them, their patience and zeal always supported them under such difﬁ-
culties. Henry the Fourth owed them immense sums: yet they did not,
in his greatest necessities, abandon him; and that hero found the nation
equally generous as brave. I here speak of the Switzers, because, in fact,
those above alluded to were often mere mercenaries. But a distinction is
tobemade betweentroops of thiskindandthoseSwitzerswhoatpresent
serve different powers, with the permission of their sovereign, and in
virtue of alliances subsisting between those powers and the Helvetic
body or some particular canton. The latter are real auxiliaries, though
paid by the sovereigns whom they serve.
Much has been said on the question—Whether the profession of a
mercenary soldier be lawful, or not,—whether individuals may, for
money or any other reward, engage to serve a foreign prince in his wars?
This question does not to me appear very difﬁcult to be solved. Those
who enter into such engagements without the express or tacit consent
of their sovereign, offend against their duty as citizens. But if their sov-
ereign leaves them at liberty to follow their inclination for a military life,
they are perfectly free in that respect. Now, every free man may join


478
book iii: of war
whatever society he pleases, according as he ﬁnds it most to <298> his
advantage. He may make its cause his own, and espouse its quarrels. He
becomes in some measure, at least for a time, a member of the state in
whose service he engages: and as an ofﬁcer is commonly at liberty toquit
the service when he thinks proper, and the private soldier at the expi-
ration of his engagement,—if that state embark in a war which is evi-
dently unjust, the foreigner may quit its service. And the mercenary sol-
dier, having now learned the art of war, has rendered himself more
capable of serving his country, if ever she require his assistance. Thislast
consideration will furnish us with an answer to a question proposed on
this head—Whether the sovereigncanwithproprietypermithissubjects
to serve foreign powers indiscriminately for money?Hecan, forthissim-
ple reason, that his subjects will thus learn an art, of which a thorough
knowledge is both useful and necessary. The tranquillity, the profound
peace, which Switzerland has so long enjoyed in the midst of all the
commotions and wars which have agitated Europe,—that long repose
would soon become fatal to her, did not her citizens, by serving foreign
princes, qualify themselves for the operations of war, and keepalivetheir
martial spirit.3
Mercenary soldiers enlist voluntarily. The sovereign has no right to
compelforeigners:hemustnotevenemploystratagemorartiﬁceinorder
to induce them to engage in a contract, which, like all others, should be
founded on candor and good faith.
As the right of levying soldiers belongs solely to the nation or the
sovereign (§7), no person must attempt to enlist soldiers in a foreign
country, without the permission of the sovereign; and even with that
permission, none but volunteers are to be enlisted: for theserviceof their
country is out of the question here; and no sovereign has a right to give
or sell his subjects to another.
The man who undertakes to enlist soldiers in a foreign country with-
3. Although Vattel’s argument was common in Swiss circles, it is notable that the
unintended consequence of mercenary employment of Swiss citizens was deemed to
be the maintenance of republican valour, when this was transposed to the defense of
Switzerland itself.
§14. What is
to be observed
in their
enlistment.
§15. Enlisting
in foreign
countries.


chapter ii
479
out the sovereign’s permission,—and, in general, whoever entices away
the subjects of another state,—violates one of the most sacred rights of
the prince and the nation. This crime is distinguished by the name of
kidnapping or man-stealing, and is punished with the utmost severity
in every well-regulated state. Foreign recruiters are hanged without
mercy, and with great justice. It is not presumed that their sovereign has
ordered them to commit a crime: and supposing even that they had re-
ceived such an order, they ought not to have obeyed it,—their sovereign
having no right to command what is contrary to the law of nature. It is
not, I say, presumed that these recruiters act by order of their sovereign:
and with respect to such of them as have practised seduction only, it is
generally thought sufﬁcient to punish them when they can be detected
and caught: if they have used violence, and made their escape, it is usual
to demand a surrender of the delinquents, and to claim the persons they
have carried off. But if it appears that they acted by order, such a pro-
ceeding in a foreign sovereignis justlyconsideredasaninjury,and<299>
as a sufﬁcient cause for declaring war against him, unless he make suit-
able reparation.
All soldiers, natives or foreigners, aretotake anoathtoservefaithfully,
and not desert the service. This is no more than what they are already
obliged to, the former as subjects, the latter by their engagement: but
their ﬁdelity is of so great importance to the state, that too many pre-
cautions cannot be taken for rendering it secure. Deserters merit severe
and exemplary punishment; and the sovereign may, if he thinks it nec-
essary, annex the penalty of death to desertion. The emissaries who so-
licit them to desert are far more guilty than the recruiters mentioned in
the preceding section.
Good order and subordination, so useful in all places, are nowhere so
necessary as in the army. The sovereign should exactly specify and de-
termine the functions, duties, and rights of military men,—of soldiers,
ofﬁcers, commanders of corps, and generals. He should regulate and ﬁx
the authority of commanders in all the gradations of rank,—the pun-
ishments to be inﬂicted on offenders,—the form of trials, &c. The laws
and ordinances relative to these several particulars form the military
code.
§16. Obliga-
tion of
soldiers.
§17. Military
laws.

480
book iii: of war
Those regulations, whose particular tendency is to maintain order
among the troops, and to enable them to perform their military service
with advantage to the state, constitute what is called military discipline.
This is of the highest importance. The Switzers were the ﬁrst among the
modern nations that revived it in its ancient vigour. It was a good dis-
cipline, added to the valour of a free people, that produced, even in the
infancy of their republic, those brilliant achievements which astonished
all Europe. Machiavel says that the Switzers are the masters of allEurope
in the art of war.* In our times, the Prussians have shewn what may be
expected from good discipline and assiduous exercise: soldiers, collected
from all quarters, have, by the force of habit and the inﬂuence of com-
mand, performed all that could be expected from the most zealous and
loyal subjects.
Every military ofﬁcer, from the ensign to the general, enjoystherights
and authority assigned him by the sovereign; and the will of the sov-
ereign in this respect is known by his express declarations, contained
either in the commissions he confers or in the military code,—or is, by
fair deduction, inferred from the natureof thefunctionsassignedtoeach
ofﬁcer: for every man who is intrusted with anemployment,ispresumed
to be invested with all the powers necessary to enable him to ﬁll his
station with propriety, and successfully discharge the several functions
of his ofﬁce.
Thus the commission of a commander in chief, when it is simple and
unlimited, gives him an absolute power over the army, a right to march
it whither he thinks proper, to undertake such operations as he ﬁnds
conducive to the service of the state, &c. <300> It is true, indeed, that
the powers of a general are often limited; but the example of marshal
Turenne sufﬁciently shews, that, when the sovereign is certain of having
made a good choice, the best thing he can do in this respect is to give
the general anunlimited power.Hadtheoperationsof thedukeof Marl-
borough depended on the directions of the cabinet, there is little prob-
ability that all his campaigns would have been crowned with such dis-
tinguished success.
* Disc. on Livy.
§18. Military
discipline.
§19. Subordi-
nate powers
in war.


chapter ii
481
When a governor is besieged in the place where he commands, and
all communication with his sovereign is cut off, that very circumstance
confers on him the whole authority of the state, so far as respects the
defence of the town and the safety of the garrison.
These particulars merit the utmost attention, as they furnish a prin-
ciple for determining what the several commanders, who are the sub-
ordinate or inferior powers in war, may execute with sufﬁcientauthority.
Exclusive of the consequences which may be deduced from the very
nature of their employments, we are likewise to consider the general
practice and established usage in this respect. If it be a known fact, that,
in the service of a particular nation, ofﬁcers of a certain rank have been
uniformly invested with such or such powers, it may reasonably be pre-
sumed that the person we are engaged with, is furnished with the same
powers.
Every promise made by any of the subordinate powers, by any com-
mander within his department, in conformity to the terms of his com-
mission and to the authority which he naturally derives from his ofﬁce
and the functions intrusted to his care,—every such promise, I say, is,
for the reasons above alleged, made in the name and by the authority of
the sovereign, and equally obligatory on him, as if he had himself per-
sonally made it. Thus a governor capitulates for the town which he com-
mands, and for the garrison; and what he has promised, the sovereign
cannot invalidate. In the last war,4 the general who commanded the
French at Lintz5 engaged to march back his troops onthissidetheRhine.
Governors of towns have often promised that, for a limited time, their
garrisons should not carry arms against the enemy with whom they ca-
pitulated: and these capitulations have always been faithfully observed.
But if a subordinate power allows himself a greater latitude, and ex-
ceeds the authority annexed to his ofﬁce, his promise becomes no more
than a private engagement, or what is called sponsio, of which we have
already treated (B. II. Ch. XIV.). This was the case of the Roman consuls
at the Furcae Caudinae. They might indeed agree to deliver hostages,and
4. War of the Austrian Succession, 1741–48.
5. Philippe-Henri, Marquis de Se´gur, 1724–1801.
§20. How
their promises
bind the
sovereign.
§21. In what
cases their
promises
bind only
themselves.


482
book iii: of war
that their army should pass under the yoke, &c. but they were not au-
thorised to conclude a peace, as they took care to signify to the Samnites.
If a subordinate power assumes an authority which he does not pos-
sess, and thus deceives the party treating with him, though an enemy,—
he is naturally responsible for the damage caused by his deception, and
bound to make reparation. I say “though an ene-<301>my”: for thefaith
of treaties is to be observed between enemies, as all men of principle
agree, and as we shall prove in the sequel. The sovereign of that fraud-
ulent ofﬁcer ought to punish him, and oblige him to repair his fault:—
it is a duty which the prince owes to justice, and to his own character.
Promises, made by a subordinate power, are obligatory on those who
are subject to his control, and bind them in every particular in which he
is authorised and accustomed to command their obedience: for, with
respect to such particulars, he is vested with the sovereign authority,
which his inferiors are bound to respect in his person. Thus, in a capit-
ulation, the governor of a town stipulates and promises for his garrison,
and even for the magistrates and citizens.
chapter iii
Of the just Causes of War.
Whoever entertains a true idea of war,—whoever considers its terrible
effects, its destructive and unhappy consequences,—will readily agree
that it should never be undertaken without the most cogent reasons.
Humanity revolts against a sovereign, who, without necessityorwithout
very powerful reasons, lavishes the blood of his most faithful subjects,
and exposes his people to the calamities of war, when he has it in his
power to maintain them in the enjoyment of anhonourableandsalutary
peace. And if to this imprudence, this want of love for his people, he
moreover adds injusticetowardsthoseheattacks,—of howgreatacrime,
or rather, of what a frightful series of crimes, does he not become guilty!
Responsible for all the misfortunes which he draws down on his own
subjects, he is moreover loaded with the guilt of all those which he in-
ﬂicts on an innocent nation. The slaughter of men, the pillage of cities,
the devastation of provinces,—such is the black catalogue of his enor-
§22. Their
assumption of
an authority
which they do
not possess.
§23. How they
bind their
inferiors.
§24. War
never to be
undertaken
without very
cogent reasons.


chapter iii
483
mities. He is responsible to God, and accountable to human nature, for
every individual that is killed, for every hut that is burned down. The
violences, the crimes, the disorders of every kind, attendant on the tu-
mult and licentiousness of war, pollute his conscience, and are set down
to his account, as he is the original author of them all. Unquestionable
truths! alarming ideas! which ought to affect the rulers of nations, and,
in all their military enterprises, inspire them with a degree of circum-
spection proportionate to the importance of the subject!
Were men always reasonable, they would terminate their contests by
the arms of reason only: natural justice and equity would be their rule,
or their judge. Force is a wretched and melancholy expedient against
those who spurn at justice, and re-<302>fuse to listen to the remon-
strances of reason: but, in short, it becomes necessary to adopt that
mode, when every other proves ineffectual. It is only in extremities that
a just and wise nation or a good prince has recourse to it, as we have
shewn in the concluding chapter of the second book. The reasonswhich
may determine him to take such a step, are of two classes. Those of the
one class shew that he has a right to make war,—that he has just grounds
for undertaking it:—these are called justiﬁcatory reasons. The others,
founded on ﬁtness and utility, determine whether it be expedient for the
sovereign to undertake a war:—these are called motives.
The right of employing force, or making war, belongs to nations no
farther than is necessary for their own defence and for the maintenance
of their rights (§3). Now if any one attacks a nation, or violates her per-
fect rights, he does her an injury. Then, and not till then, that nation
has a right to repel the aggressor, and reduce him to reason. Further, she
has a right to prevent the intended injury, when she sees herself threat-
ened with it (Book II. §50). Let us then say in general, that the foun-
dation or cause of every just war is injury, either already done, or threat-
ened. The justiﬁcatory reasons for war shew that an injury has been
received, or so far threatened as to authorise a prevention of it by arms.
It is evident, however, that here the question regards the principal in the
war, and not those who join in it as auxiliaries. When, therefore, we
would judge whether a war be just, we must consider whether he who
undertakes it has in fact received an injury, or whetherhebereallythreat-
ened with one. And in order to determine what is to be considered as
§25. Justiﬁca-
tory reasons,
and motives
for making
war.
§26. What is
in general a
just cause
of war.


484
book iii: of war
an injury, we must be acquainted with a nation’s rights, properly so
called,—that is to say, her perfect rights. These are of various kinds, and
very numerous, but may all be referred to the general heads of which
we have already treated, and shall further treat in the course of thiswork.
Whatever strikes at these rights is an injury, and a just cause of war.
The immediate consequence of the premisses is, that if a nationtakes
up arms when she has received no injury, nor is threatened with any, she
undertakes an unjust war. Those alone, to whom an injury is done or
intended, have a right to make war.
From the same principle we shall likewise deduce the just and lawful
object of every war, which is, to avenge or prevent injury. To avenge sig-
niﬁes here to prosecute the reparation of an injury, if it be of a nature
to be repaired,—or, if the evil be irreparable, to obtain a just satisfac-
tion,—and also to punish the offender, if requisite, with a view of pro-
viding for our future safety. The right to security authorises us to do all
this (Book II. §§49–52). We may therefore distinctlypointout,asobjects
of a lawful war, the three following—1. To recover what belongs or is
due to us. 2. To provide for our future safety by punishing the aggressor
or offender. 3. To defend ourselves, or to protect our-<303>selves from
injury, by repelling unjust violence. The two ﬁrst are the objects of an
offensive, the third that of a defensive war. Camillus, when on the point
of attacking the Gauls, concisely set forth to his soldiers all the subjects
on which war can be grounded or justiﬁed—omnia, quae defendi, repe-
tique, et ulcisci fas sit.*6
As the nation, or her ruler, ought, in every undertaking, not only to
respect justice, but also to keep in view the advantage of the state,—it
is necessary that proper and commendable motives should concur with
the justiﬁcatory reasons, to induce a determination to embark in a war.
These reasons shew that the sovereign has a right to take up arms, that
* Livy, lib. v. cap. 49.
6. “Everything, in a word, which it was their duty to defend, to recover, or to
avenge” (trans. Eds.). The famous Roman soldier and statesman Marcus Furius
Camillus (ca. b.c. 446–356) defended Rome against successive Gallic invasionswhen
serving as dictator, as described by Plutarch and Livy.
§27. What
war is unjust.
§28. The
object of war.
§29. Both
justiﬁcatory
reasons and
proper motives
requisite in
undertaking
a war.


chapter iii
485
he has just cause to do so. The proper motives shew that in the present
case it is advisable and expedient to make use of his right. These latter
relate to prudence, as the justiﬁcatory reasons come under the head of
justice.
I call proper and commendable motives those derived from the good of
the state, from the safety and common advantage of the citizens. They
are inseparable from the justiﬁcatory reasons,—a breach of justicebeing
never truly advantageous. Though an unjust war may for a time enrich
a state, and extend her frontiers, it renders her odious to other nations,
and exposes her to the danger of being crushed by them. Besides, do
opulence and extent of dominion always constitute the happiness of
states? Amidst the multitude of examples which might here be quoted,
let us conﬁne our view to that of the Romans. The Roman republic
ruined herself by her triumphs, by the excess of her conquests and
power. Rome, when mistress of the world, but enslaved by tyrants and
oppressed by a military government, had reason to deplore the success
of her arms, and to look back with regret on those happy times when
her power did not extend beyond the bounds of Italy, or even when her
dominion was almost conﬁned within the circuit of her walls.
Vicious motives are those which have not for their object the good of
the state, and which, instead of being drawn from that pure source, are
suggested by the violence of the passions. Such are the arrogant desire
of command, the ostentation of power, the thirst of riches, the avidity
of conquest, hatred and revenge.
The whole right of the nation, and consequently of the sovereign, is
derived from the welfare of the state; and by this rule itistobemeasured.
The obligation to promote and maintain the true welfare of the society
or state gives the nation a right totakeuparmsagainsthimwhothreatens
or attacks that valuable enjoyment. But if a nation, on an injury done
to her, is induced to take up arms, not by the necessity of procuring a
just reparation, but by a vicious motive, she abuses her right. The vi-
ciousness of the motive tarnishes the lustre of her arms, which might
otherwise have shone in the cause of justice:—the <304> war is not un-
dertaken for the lawful cause which the nation had to engage in it: that
cause is now no more than a pretext. As to the sovereign in particular,
§30. Proper
motives.
Vicious
motives.
§31. War
undertaken
upon just
grounds, but
from vicious
motives.

486
book iii: of war
the ruler of the nation,—what right has he to expose the safety of the
state, with the lives and fortunes of the citizens, to gratify his passions?
It is only for the good of the nation that the supreme power is intrusted
to him; and it is with that view that he ought to exert it: that is the object
prescribed to him even in his least important measures: and shall he un-
dertake the most important and the most dangerous, from motives for-
eign or contrary to that great end? Yet nothing is more common than
such a destructive inversion of views; and it is remarkable, that, on this
account, the judicious Polybius gives the name of causes* to the motives
on which war is undertaken,—and of pretexts † to the justiﬁcatory rea-
sons alleged in defence of it. Thus he informs us that the cause of the
war which Greece undertook against the Persians was the experienceshe
had had of their weakness, and that the pretext alleged by Philip, or by
Alexander after him, was the desire of avenging the injuries which the
Greeks had so often suffered, and of providing for their future safety.
Let us however entertain a better opinion of nations and their rulers.
There are just causes of war, real justiﬁcatory reasons; and why should
there not be sovereigns who sincerely consider them as their warrant,
when they have besides reasonable motives for taking up arms? We shall
therefore give the name of pretexts to those reasons alleged as justiﬁca-
tory, but which are so only in appearance, or which are even absolutely
destitute of all foundation. The name of pretexts may likewise be ap-
plied to reasons which are, in themselves, true and well-founded, but,
not being of sufﬁcient importance for undertaking a war, are made use
of only to cover ambitious views, or some other vicious motive. Such
was the complaint of the czar Peter I. that sufﬁcient honours had not
been paid him on his passage through Riga. His other reasons for de-
claring war against Sweden I here omit.
Pretexts are at least a homage which unjust men pay to justice. He
who screens himself with them shews that he still retains some sense of
shame. He does not openly trample on what is most sacred in human
* Aitiai. Histor. lib. iii. cap. 6.
† Profaseic.
§32. Pretexts.


chapter iii
487
society: he tacitly acknowledges that a ﬂagrant injustice merits the in-
dignation of all mankind.
Whoever, without justiﬁcatory reasons, undertakesawarmerelyfrom
motives of advantage, acts without any right, and his war is unjust. And
he, who, having in reality just grounds for taking up arms, isnevertheless
solely actuated by interested views in resorting to hostilities, cannot in-
deed be charged with injustice, but he betrays a vicious disposition: his
conduct is reprehensible, and sullied by the badness of his motives. War
is so dreadful a scourge, that nothing less than manifest justice, joined
to a kind of necessity, can authorise it, render it commendable,oratleast
exempt it from reproach. <305>
Nations that are always ready to take up arms on any prospect of
advantage, are lawless robbers: but those who seem to delight in the rav-
ages of war, who spread it on all sides, without reasons or pretexts, and
even without any other motive than their own ferocity, are monsters,
unworthy the name of men. They should be considered as enemies to
the human race, in the same manner as, in civil society, professed assas-
sins and incendiaries are guilty, not only towards the particular victims
of their nefarious deeds, but also towards the state, which thereforepro-
claims them public enemies. All nations have a right to join in a con-
federacy for the purpose of punishing and even exterminatingthosesav-
age nations. Such were several German tribes mentioned by Tacitus,—
such those barbarians who destroyed the Roman empire: nor was it till
long after their conversion to Christianity that this ferocity wore off.
Such have been the Turks and other Tartars,—Genghis-khan, Timur-
Bec or Tamerlane, who, like Attila, were scourges employedbythewrath
of heaven, and who made war only for the pleasure of making it. Such
are, in polished ages and among the most civilised nations, those sup-
posed heroes, whose supreme delight is a battle, and who make warfrom
inclination purely, and not from love to their country.
Defensive war is just when made against an unjust aggressor. This
requires no proof. Self-defence against unjust violence is not only the
right but the duty of a nation, and one of her most sacred duties. But
if the enemy who wages offensive war has justice on his side, we have
no right to make forcible opposition; and the defensive war then be-
§33. War
undertaken
merely for
advantage.
§34. Nations
who make war
without reason
or apparent
motives.
§35. How
defensive
war is just
or unjust.


488
book iii: of war
comes unjust: for that enemy only exerts his lawful right:—he took up
arms only to obtain justice which was refused to him; and it is an act of
injustice to resist any one in the exertion of his right.
All that remains to be done in such a case is to offer the invader a just
satisfaction. If he will not be content with this, a nation gains one great
advantage,—that of having turned the balance of justice on her own
side; and his hostilities now becoming unjust, as having no longer any
foundation, may very justly be opposed.
The Samnites, instigated by the ambition of their chiefs, had ravaged
the lands of the allies of Rome. When they became sensible of their
misconduct, they offered full reparation for the damages, with everyrea-
sonable satisfaction: but all their submissions could not appease the Ro-
mans; whereupon Caius Pontius, general of the Samnites, said to his
men, “Since the Romans are absolutely determined on war, necessity
justiﬁes it on our side; an appeal to arms becomes lawful on the part of
those who are deprived of every other resource”—Justumestbellum,qui-
bus necessarium; et pia arma, quibus nulla nisi in armis relinquitur spes.*7
In order to estimate the justice of an offensive war, the nature of the
subject for which a nation takes up arms must be ﬁrst <306> considered.
We should be thoroughly assured of our rightbeforeweproceedtoassert
it in so dreadful a manner. If, therefore, the question relate to a thing
which is evidently just, as the recovery of our property, the assertion of
a clear and incontestable right, or the attainment of just satisfaction for
a manifest injury,—and if we cannot obtain justice otherwise than by
force of arms,—offensive war becomes lawful. Two things are therefore
necessary to render it just,—ﬁrst, some right which is to be asserted,—
that is to say, that we be authorised to demand something of another
nation:—2. that we be unable to obtain it otherwise than by force of
arms. Necessity alone warrants the use of force. It is a dangerous and
terrible resource. Nature, the common parent of mankind, allows of it
only in cases of the last extremity, and when all other means fail. It is
* Livy [[Ab urbe condita]], lib. ix. init.
7. “Just is the war that is necessary and the arms are righteous, where there is hope
in nothing but arms” (trans. Eds.).
§36. How it
may become
just against an
offensive war
which at ﬁrst
was just.
§37. How an
offensive war
is just in an
evident cause.


chapter iii
489
doing wrong to a nation, to make use of violence against her, before we
know whether she be disposed to do us justice, or to refuse it.
Those who, without trying paciﬁc measures, run to arms on every
triﬂing occasion, sufﬁciently shew that justiﬁcatory reasons are, in their
mouths, mere pretexts: they eagerly seize the opportunity of indulging
their passions and gratifying their ambition under some colour of right.
In a doubtful cause, where the rights are uncertain, obscure, and dis-
putable, all that can be reasonably required, is, that the question be dis-
cussed (Book II. §331), and that, if it be impossible fully to clear it up,
the contest be terminated by an equitable compromise. If therefore one
of the parties should refuse to accede to such conciliatory measures, the
other is justiﬁable in taking up arms to compel him to an accommo-
dation. And we must observe, that war does not decide the question;
victory only compels the vanquished to subscribe to the treaty which
terminates the difference. It is an error, no less absurd than pernicious,
to say that war is todecidecontroversiesbetweenthosewhoacknowledge
no superior judge,—as is the case with nations. Victory usually favours
the cause of strength and prudence rather than that of right and justice.
It would be a bad rule of decision; but it is an effectual mode of com-
pelling him who refuses to accede to such measures as are consonant to
justice; and it becomes just in the hands of a prince who uses it season-
ably and for a lawful cause.
War cannot be just on both sides. One party claims a right; the other
disputes it:—the one complains of an injury; the other denies having
done it. They may be considered as two individuals disputing on the
truth of a proposition; and it is impossible that two contrary sentiments
should be true at the same time.
It may however happen that both the contending parties are candid
and sincere in their intentions; and, in a doubtful cause, it is still un-
certain which side is in the right. Wherefore, since nations are equal and
independent (Book II. §36, and Prelim. §§18, 19), and cannot claim a
right of judgment over each other, it <307> follows, that, in every case
susceptible of doubt, the arms of the two parties at war are to be ac-
counted equally lawful, at least as to external effects, and until the de-
cision of the cause. But neither does that circumstance deprive other
§38. In a
doubtful
cause.
§39. War
cannot be just
on both sides.
§40. Some-
times reputed
lawful.


490
book iii: of war
nations of the liberty of forming their own judgment on the case, in
order to determine how they are to act, and to assist that party who shall
appear to have right on his side,—nor does that effect of the indepen-
dence of nations operate in exculpation of the author of an unjust war,
who certainly incurs a high degree of guilt. But if he acts in consequence
of invincible ignorance or error, the injustice of his arms is not imput-
able to him.
When offensive war has for its object the punishment of a nation, it
ought, like every other war, to be founded on right and necessity. 1. On
right:—an injury must have been actually received. Injury alone being
a just cause of war (§26), the reparation of it may be lawfullyprosecuted:
or if in its nature it be irreparable (the only case in which we are allowed
to punish), we are authorised to provide for our own safety, and even for
that of all other nations, by inﬂicting on the offender a punishment
capable of correcting him, and serving as an example to others. 2. A war
of this kind must have necessity to justify it: that is to say, that, to be
lawful, it must be the only remaining mode to obtain a just satisfaction;
which implies a reasonable security for the time to come. If that com-
plete satisfaction be offered, or if it may be obtained without a war, the
injury is done away, and the right to security no longer authorises us to
seek vengeance for it.—See Book II. §§49, 52.
The nation in fault is bound to submit to a punishment which she
has deserved, and to suffer it by way of atonement: but she is notobliged
to give herself up to the discretion of an incensed enemy. Therefore,
when attacked, she ought to make a tender of satisfaction, and ask what
penalty is required; and if no explicit answer be given, or the adversary
attempts to impose a disproportionate penalty, she then acquires a right
to resist, and her defence becomes lawful.
On the whole, however, it is evident that the offended party alonehas
a right to punish independent persons. We shall not here repeat what
we have said elsewhere (Book II. §7) of the dangerous mistake or ex-
travagant pretensions of those who assume a right of punishing an in-
dependent nation for faults which do not concern them,—who, madly
setting themselves up as defenders of the cause of God, take upon them
to punish the moral depravity or irreligion of a people not committed
to their superintendency.
§41. War
undertaken
to punish
a nation.


chapter iii
491
Here a very celebrated question, and of the highest importance, pre-
sents itself. It is asked, whether the aggrandisement of a neighbouring
power, by whom a nation fears she may one day be crushed, be a sufﬁ-
cient reason for making war against him,—whether she be justiﬁable in
taking up arms to oppose his aggrandisement, or to weaken him, with
the sole view of securing herself <308> from those dangers which the
weaker states have almost always reason to apprehend from an over-
grown power. To the majority of politicians this question is noproblem:
it is more difﬁcult of solution to those who wish to see justice and pru-
dence ever inseparably united.
On the one hand, a state that increases her power by all the arts of
good government, does no more than what is commendable: she fulﬁls
her duties towards herself, without violating those which she owes to
other nations. The sovereign, who, by inheritance, by free election, or
by any other just and honourable means, enlarges his dominions by the
addition of new provinces or entire kingdoms, only makes use of his
right, without injuring any person. How then should it be lawful to at-
tack a state which, for its aggrandisement, makes use only of lawful
means? We must either have actually suffered an injury or be visibly
threatened with one, before we are authorised to take up arms, or have
just grounds for making war (§§26, 27). On the other hand it is but too
well known from sad and uniform experience, that predominatingpow-
ers seldom fail to molest their neighbours, to oppress them, and even
totally subjugate them, whenever an opportunity occurs, and they can
do it with impunity. Europe was on the point of falling into servitude
for want of a timely opposition to the growing fortune of Charles V. Is
the danger to be waited for? Is the storm, which might be dispersed at
its rising, to be permitted to increase? Are we to allow of the aggrandise-
ment of a neighbour, and quietly wait till he makes his preparations to
enslave us? Will it be a time to defend ourselves when we are deprived
of the means?—Prudence is a duty incumbent on all men, and most
pointedly so on the heads of nations, as being commissioned to watch
over the safety of a whole people. Let us endeavour to solve this mo-
mentous question, agreeably to the sacred principles of thelawof nature
and of nations. We shall ﬁnd that they do not lead to weak scruples, and
that it is an invariable truth that justice is inseparable from sound policy.
§42. Whether
the aggran-
disement of a
neighbouring
power can
authorise a war
against him.

492
book iii: of war
And ﬁrst, let us observe, that prudence, which is, no doubt, a virtue
highly necessary insovereigns,canneverrecommendtheuseof unlawful
means for the attainment of a just and laudable end. Let not the safety
of the people, that supreme law of the state, be alleged here inobjection;
for the very safety of the people itself, and thecommonsafetyof nations,
prohibit the use of means which are repugnant to justice and probity.
Why are certain means unlawful? If we closely consider the point, if we
trace it to its ﬁrst principles, we shall see that it is purely because the
introduction of them would be pernicious to human society, and pro-
ductive of fatal consequences to all nations. See particularly what we
have said concerning the observance of justice (Book II. Ch. V.). For
the interest, therefore, and even the safety of nations, we ought to hold
it as a sacred maxim, that the end does not sanctify the means. And since
war is not <309> justiﬁable on any other ground than that of avenging
an injury received, or preserving ourselves from one with which we are
threatened (§26), it is a sacred principle of the law of nations, that an
increase of power cannot, alone and of itself, give any one a right to take
up arms in order to oppose it.
No injury has been received from that power (so the question sup-
poses). We must therefore have good grounds to think ourselves threat-
ened by him, before we can lawfully have recourse to arms. Now power
alone does not threaten an injury:—it must be accompanied by the will.
It is indeed very unfortunate for mankind, that the will and inclination
to oppress may be almost always supposed, where there is a power of
oppressing with impunity. But these two things are not necessarily in-
separable: and the only right which we derive from the circumstance of
their being generally or frequently united, is that of taking the ﬁrst ap-
pearances for a sufﬁcient indication. When once a state has given proofs
of injustice, rapacity, pride, ambition, or an imperious thirst of rule, she
becomes an object of suspicion to her neighbours, whose duty it is to
stand on their guard against her. They may come upon her at the mo-
ment when she is on the point of acquiring a formidable accession of
power,—may demand securities,—and, if she hesitates to give them,
may prevent her designs by force of arms. The interests of nations are,
in point of importance, widely different from those of individuals: the
§43. Alone
and of itself, it
cannot give a
right to attack
him.
§44. How the
appearances of
danger give
that right.


chapter iii
493
sovereign must not be remiss in his attention to them, nor suffer his
generosity and greatness of soul to supercede his suspicions. A nation
that has a neighbour at once powerful and ambitious, has her all at stake.
As men are under a necessity of regulating their conduct in most cases
by probabilities, those probabilities claim their attention in proportion
to the importance of the subject: and (to make use of a geometrical
expression) their right to obviate a danger is in a compound ratio of the
degree of probability, and the greatness of the evil threatened. If the evil
in question be of a supportable nature,—if it be only some slightloss,—
matters are not to be precipitated: there is no great danger in delaying
our opposition to it, till there be a certainty of our being threatened.But
if the safety of the state lies at stake, our precaution and foresightcannot
be extended too far. Must we delay to avert our ruin till it is become
inevitable? If the appearances are so easily credited, it is the fault of that
neighbour, who has betrayed his ambition by several indications. If
Charles the Second, king of Spain,8 instead of settling the successionon
the duke of Anjou, had appointed for his heir Louis XIV. himself,—to
have tamely suffered the union of the monarchy of Spain with that of
France, would, according to all the rules of human foresight, have been
nothing less than delivering up all Europe to servitude, or at least re-
ducing it to the most critical and precarious situation. But then, if two
independent nations think ﬁt to unite, so as afterwards to form onejoint
empire, have they not a right to do it? And who is authorised to <310>
oppose them? I answer, they have a right to form such a union, provided
the views by which they are actuated be not prejudicial to other states.
Now if each of the two nations in question be, separately and without
assistance, able to govern and support herself, andtodefendherself from
insult and oppression, it may be reasonably presumed that the object of
their coalition is to domineer over their neighbours. And on occasions
where it is impossible or too dangerous to wait for an absolute certainty,
we may justly act on a reasonable presumption. If a stranger levels a
musket at me in the middle of a forest, I am not yet certain that he
intends to kill me: but shall I, in order to be convinced of his design,
8. Charles II of Spain, r. 1665–1700.


494
book iii: of war
allow him time to ﬁre? What reasonable casuist will deny me the right
to anticipate him? But presumption becomes nearly equivalent to cer-
tainty, if the prince who is on the point of rising to an enormous power,
has already given proofs of imperious pride and insatiable ambition. In
the preceding supposition, who could have advised the powers of Eu-
rope to suffer such a formidable accession to the power of Louis the
Fourteenth? Too certain of the use he would have made of it,theywould
have joined in opposing it: and in this their safety warranted them.9 To
say that they should have allowed him time to establish his dominion
over Spain, and consolidate the union of the two monarchies,—and
that, for fear of doing him an injury, they should have quietly waited
till he crushed them all,—would not this be, in fact, depriving mankind
of the right to regulate their conduct by the dictates of prudence, and
to act on the ground of probability? Would it not be robbing them of
the liberty to provide for their own safety, as long as they have not math-
ematical demonstration of its being in danger? It would have been in
vain to have preached such a doctrine. The principal sovereigns of Eu-
rope, habituated, by the administration of Louvois,10 to dread the views
and power of Louis XIV. carried their mistrust so far, that they would
not even suffer a prince of the house of France to sit on the throne of
Spain, though invited to it by the nation, whose approbation had sanc-
tioned the will of her former sovereign. He ascended it, however, not-
withstanding the efforts of those who so strongly dreaded his elevation;
and it has since appeared that their policy was too suspicious.
It is still easier to prove, that, should that formidable power betray an
unjust and ambitious disposition by doing the least injustice to another,
all nations may avail themselves of the occasion, and, by joining the
injured party, thus form a coalition of strength, in order to humble that
ambitious potentate, and disable him from so easily oppressing his
9. Vattel here argues that war was justiﬁed against Louis XIV in order to prevent
universal monarchy in Europe.
10. Franc¸ois-Michel Le Tellier (1641–91), Marquis de Louvois, served as secretary
of state for war under Louis XIV of France and was particularly concerned with the
reform of the army.
§45. Another
case more
evident.


chapter iii
495
neighbours, or keeping them in continual awe and fear. For an injury
gives us a right to provide for our future safety, by depriving the unjust
aggressor of the means of injuring us; and it is lawful and even praise-
worthy to assist those who are oppressed, or unjustly attacked.
Enough has been said on this subject, to set the minds of politicians
at ease, and to relieve them from all apprehension that a <311> strict and
punctilious observance of justice in this particular would pave the way
to slavery. It is perhaps wholly unprecedented that a state should receive
any remarkable accession of power, without giving other states just
causes of complaint. Let the other nations be watchful and alert in re-
pressing that growing power, and they will have nothing to fear. The
emperor Charles V. laid hold on the pretext of religion, in order to op-
press the princes of the empire, and subject them to his absolute au-
thority. If, by following up his victory over the elector of Saxony,11 he
had accomplished that vast design, the liberties of all Europewouldhave
been endangered. It was therefore with good reason that France assisted
the protestants of Germany:—the care of her own safety authorisedand
urged her to the measure. When the same prince seized on the duchy of
Milan, the sovereigns of Europe ought to have assisted France in con-
tending with him for the possession of it, and to have taken advantage of
the circumstance, in order to reduce his power within just bounds. Had
they prudently availed themselves of the just causes which he soon gave
them to form a league against him, they would have saved themselves the
subsequent anxieties for their tottering liberty.12
But, suppose that powerful state, by the justice and circumspection
of her conduct, affords us no room to take exception to herproceedings,
are we to view her progress with an eye of indifference? are we to remain
quiet spectators of the rapid increase of her power, and imprudently
expose ourselvestosuch designsasitmayinspireherwith?—No,beyond
11. The Holy Roman Emperor Charles V (r. 1530–56) defeated John Frederick,
elector of Saxony, in 1547 at Mu¨hlberg, outside Leipzig.
12. Once again Vattel underlines the danger of monarchs in Europe aspiring to
expand their power and upset the existing balance between states. His strategy for
ending the threat of universal monarchy is outlined in the following paragraphs.
§46. Other
allowable
means of
defence against
a formidable
power.


496
book iii: of war
all doubt. In a matter of so high importance, imprudent supineness
would be unpardonable. The example of the Romans is a good lesson
for all sovereigns. Had the potentates of those times concerted together
to keep a watchful eye on the enterprises of Rome, and to check her
encroachments, they would not have successively fallen into servitude.
But force of arms is not the only expedient by which we may guard
against a formidable power. There are other means, of a gentler nature,
and which are at all times lawful. The most effectual is a confederacy of
the less powerful sovereigns, who, by this coalition of strength, become
able to hold the balance against that potentate whose power excitestheir
alarms. Let them be ﬁrm and faithful in their alliance; and their union
will prove the safety of each.
They may also mutually favour each other, to the exclusion of him
whom they fear; and by reciprocally allowing various advantages to the
subjects of the allies, especially in trade, and refusing them to those of
that dangerous potentate, they will augment their own strength, and
diminish his, without affording him any just cause of complaint, since
every one is at liberty to grant favours and indulgences at his own
pleasure.
Europe forms a political system, an integral body, closely connected
by the relations and different interests of the nations inhabitingthispart
of the world. It is not, as formerly, a con-<312>fused heap of detached
pieces, each of which thought herself very little concerned in the fate
of the others, and seldom regarded things which did not immediately
concern her. The continual attention of sovereigns to every occurrence,
the constant residence of ministers, and the perpetual negotiations,
make of modern Europe a kind of republic, of which the members—
each independent, but all linked together by the ties of common inter-
est—unite for the maintenance of order and liberty. Hence arose that
famous scheme of the political balance, or the equilibrium of power; by
which is understood such a disposition of things, as that no one poten-
tate be able absolutely to predominate, and prescribe laws to the others.
The surest means of preserving that equilibrium would be, that no
power should be much superior to the others,—that all, or at least the
greater part, should be nearly equal in force. Such a project has been
§47. Political
equilibrium.
§48. Ways of
maintaining it.


chapter iii
497
attributed to Henry the Fourth:* but it would have been impossible to
carry it into execution without injustice and violence. Besides, suppose
such equality once established, how could it always be maintained by
lawful means? Commerce, industry, military pre-eminence, would soon
put an end to it. The right of inheritance, vesting even in women and
their descendents,—a rule, which it was so absurd to establish in thecase
of sovereignties, but which nevertheless is established,—would com-
pletely overturn the whole system.
It is a more simple, an easier, and a more equitable plan, to have re-
course to the method just mentioned, of forming confederacies in order
to oppose the more powerful potentate, and prevent him from giving
law to his neighbours. Such is the mode at present pursued by the sov-
ereigns of Europe. They consider the two principal powers, which on
that very account are naturally rivals, as destined to be checks on each
other; and they unite with the weaker, like so many weights thrown into
the lighter scale, in order to keep it in equilibrium with the other. The
house of Austria has long been the preponderating power: at present
France is so in her turn. England, whose opulence and formidable ﬂeets
have a powerful inﬂuence, without alarming any state on the score of
its liberty, because that nation seems cured of the rage of conquest,—
England, I say, has the glory of holding the political balance. She is at-
tentive to preserve it in equilibrium:—a system of policy, which is in
itself highly just and wise, and will ever entitle her to praise, as long as
she continues to pursue it only by means of alliances, confederacies,and
other methods equally lawful.13
* Of France.
13. Vattel has attacked projects for perpetual peace associated with expanding
French power as unworkable, and argues that only greater British involvement in
European power politics can retain a political equilibrium which would maintain
existing states—especially the smaller republics threatened by commercial monar-
chies. This argument becomes commonplace in republican reform politics in the de-
cades up to the French Revolution.

498
book iii: of war
Confederacies would be a sure mode of preserving the equilibrium,
and thus maintaining the liberty of nations, did all princes thoroughly
understand their true interests, and make the welfare of the state serve
as the rule in all their proceedings. Great potentates, however, are but
too successful in gaining over par-<313>tisans and allies, who blindly
adopt all their views. Dazzled by the glare of a present advantage, se-
duced by their avarice, deceived by faithless ministers,—how many
princes become the tools of apowerwhichwillonedayswallowupeither
themselves or their successors! The safest plan, therefore, is to seize the
ﬁrst favourable opportunity when we can, consistently with justice,
weaken that potentate who destroys the equilibrium (§45)—or to em-
ploy every honourable means to prevent his acquiring too formidable a
degree of power. For that purpose, all the other nations should be par-
ticularly attentive not to suffer him to aggrandise himself by arms: and
this they may at all times do with justice. For if this prince makes an
unjust war, every one has a right to succour the oppressed party. If he
makes a just war, the neutral nations may interfere as mediators for an
accommodation,—they may induce the weaker state to propose reason-
able terms and offer a fair satisfaction,—and may save her from falling
under the yoke of a conqueror. On the offer of equitable conditions to
the prince who wages even the most justiﬁable war, he has all that he can
demand. The justice of his cause, as we shall soon see, never gives him
a right to subjugate his enemy, unless when that extremity becomes nec-
essary to his own safety, or when he has no other mode of obtaining
indemniﬁcation for the injury he has received. Now, that is not the case
here, as the interposing nations can by other means procure him a just
indemniﬁcation, and an assurance of safety.
In ﬁne, there cannot exist a doubt, that, if that formidable potentate
certainly entertain designs of oppression and conquest,—if he betray
his views by his preparations and other proceedings,—the other states
have a right to anticipate him: and if the fate of war declares in their
favour, they are justiﬁable in taking advantage of thishappyopportunity
to weaken and reduce a power too contrary to the equilibrium, and dan-
gerous to the common liberty.
Thisrightof nationsisstillmoreevidentagainstasovereign,who,from
§49. How he
who destroys
the equilib-
rium may
be restrained,
or even
weakened.


chapter iii
499
an habitual propensity to take up arms without reasons or even so much
as plausible pretexts, is continually disturbing the public tranquillity.
This leads us to a particular question nearly allied to the preceding.
When a neighbour, in the midst of a profound peace, erects fortresses
on our frontier, equips a ﬂeet, augments his troops, assembles apowerful
army, ﬁlls his magazines,—in a word, when he makes preparations for
war,—are we allowed to attack him with a view to prevent the danger
with which we think ourselves threatened? The answer greatly depends
on the manners and character of that neighbour. We must inquire into
the reasons of those preparations, and bring him to an explanation:—
such is the mode of proceeding in Europe: and if his sincerity be justly
suspected, securities may be required of him. His refusal in this case
would furnish ample indication of sinister designs, and a sufﬁcient rea-
son to justify us in anticipating <314> them. But if that sovereign has
never betrayed any symptoms of baseness and perﬁdy, and especially if
at that time there is no dispute subsisting between him and us, why
should we not quietly rest on his word, only taking such precautions as
prudence renders indispensable? We ought not, withoutsufﬁcientcause,
to presume him capable of exposinghimself toinfamybyaddingperﬁdy
to violence. As long as he has not rendered his sincerity questionable,we
have no right to require any other security from him.
It is true, however, that if a sovereign continues to keep up a powerful
army in profound peace, his neighbours must not suffer their vigilance
to be entirely lulled to sleep by his bare word; and prudence requiresthat
they should keep themselves on their guard. However certain they may
be of the good-faith of that prince, unforeseen differences may inter-
vene; and shall they leave him the advantage of being provided at that
juncture with a numerous and well-disciplined army, while they them-
selves will have only new levies to oppose it? Unquestionably, no. This
would be leaving themselves almost wholly at his discretion. They are
therefore under the necessity of following his example, and keeping, as
he does, a numerous army on foot:—and what a burden is this to a state!
Formerly, and without going any farther back than the last century, it
was pretty generally made an article in every treaty of peace, that the
belligerent powers should disarm on both sides,—that they should dis-
§50. Behav-
iour allowable
towards a
neighbour
preparing
for war.


500
book iii: of war
band their troops. If, in a time of profound peace, a prince was disposed
to keep up any considerable number of forces, his neighbours tooktheir
measures accordingly, formed leagues against him, and obliged him to
disarm. Why has not that salutary custom been preserved? The constant
maintenance of numerous armies deprives the soil of its cultivators,
checks the progress of population, and can only serve to destroy the
liberties of the nation by whom they are maintained. Happy England!
whose situation exempts it from any considerable charge in supporting
the instruments of despotism. Happy Switzerland! if, continuing care-
fully to exercise her militia, she keeps herself in a condition to repel any
foreign enemies, without feeding a host of idle soldiers who might one
day crush the liberties of the people, and even bid deﬁance to the lawful
authority of the sovereign. Of this the Roman legions furnish a signal
instance. This happy method of afree republic,—thecustomof training
upall her citizenstotheartof war,—rendersthestaterespectableabroad,
and saves it from a very pernicious defect at home. It would have been
every-where imitated, had the public good been every-where the only
object in view.
Sufﬁcient has now been said on the general principles for estimating
the justice of a war. Those who are thoroughly acquainted withtheprin-
ciples, and have just ideas of the various rights of nations, will easily
apply the rules to particular cases. <315>
chapter iv
Of the Declaration of War,—
and of War in due form.
The right of making war belongs to nations only as a remedy against
injustice: it is the offspring of unhappy necessity. This remedy is so
dreadful in its effects, so destructive to mankind, so grievous even to the
party whohas recoursetoit,thatunquestionablythelawof natureallows
of it only in the last extremity,—that is to say, when every other expe-
dient proves ineffectual for the maintenance of justice. It is demon-
§51. Declara-
tion of war.


chapter iv
501
strated in the foregoing chapter, that, in order to be justiﬁable in taking
up arms, it is necessary—1. That we have a just cause of complaint. 2.
That a reasonable satisfaction have been denied us. 3. The ruler of the
nation, as we have observed, ought maturely to consider whether it be
for the advantage of the state to prosecute his right by force of arms.
But all this is not sufﬁcient. As it is possible that the present fear of our
arms may make an impression on the mind of our adversary, and induce
him to do us justice,—we owe this farther regard to humanity, and es-
pecially to the lives and peace of the subjects, to declare to that unjust
nation, or its chief, that we are at length going to have recourse to the
last remedy, and make use of open force for the purpose of bringinghim
to reason. This is called declaring war. All this is included in the Roman
manner of proceeding, regulated in their fecial law. They ﬁrst sent the
chief of the feciales or heralds, called pater patratus, to demand satisfac-
tion of the nation who had offended them; and if within the space of
thirty-three days that nation did not return a satisfactory answer, the
herald called the gods to be witnesses of the injustice, and came away,
saying that the Romans would consider what measures they should
adopt. The king, and in after times the consul, hereupon asked the sen-
ate’s opinion; and when war was resolved on, the herald was sent back
to the frontier, where he declared it.* It is surprising to ﬁnd among the
Romans such justice, such moderation and prudence, atatimetoowhen
apparently nothing but courage and ferocity was to be expected from
them. By such scrupulous delicacy in the conduct of her wars, Rome
laid a most solid foundation for her subsequent greatness.
A declaration of war being necessary as a further effort to terminate
the difference without the effusion of blood, by making use of the prin-
ciple of fear in order to bring the enemy tomoreequitablesentiments,—
it ought, at the same time that it announces our settled resolution of
making war, to set forth the <316> reasons which have induced us to
take up arms. This is at present the constant practice among the powers
of Europe.
* Livy, lib. i. cap. 31.
Necessity
thereof.
§52. What it is
to contain.


502
book iii: of war
After a fruitless application for justice, a nation may proceed to a dec-
laration of war, which is then pure and simple. But, to include the whole
business in a single act instead of two separate ones, the demand of
justice (called by the Romans rerum repetitio) may, if we think proper,
be accompanied by a conditional declaration of war, notifying that we
will commence hostilities unless we obtain immediate satisfaction on
such or such subject. In this case there is no necessity for adding a pure
and simple declaration of war,—the conditional one sufﬁcing, if the en-
emy delays giving satisfaction.
If the enemy, on either declaration of war, offers equitableconditions
of peace, we are bound to refrain from hostilities; for as soon as justice
is done to us, that immediately supercedes all right to employ force,
which we are not allowed to use unless for the necessary maintenance
of our rights. To these offers, however, are to be added securities; for we
are under no obligation to suffer ourselves to be amused by empty pro-
posals. The word of a sovereign is a sufﬁcient security, as long as he has
not disgraced his credit by any act of perﬁdy: and we should be con-
tented with it. As to the conditions themselves,—besides the principal
subject, we have a right to demand a reimbursement of the expenses
incurred in our preparations for war.
It is necessary that the declaration of warbeknowntothestateagainst
whom it is made. This is all which the natural law of nations requires.
Nevertheless, if custom has introduced certain formalities in the busi-
ness, those nations, who, by adopting the custom, have given their tacit
consent to such formalities, are under an obligation of observing them,
as long as they have not set them aside by a public renunciation (Prelim.
§26). Formerly the powers of Europe used to send heralds or embassa-
dors to declare war; at present they content themselves with publishing
the declaration in the capital, in the principal towns, or on the frontiers:
manifestoes are issued; and through the easy and expeditious channels
of communication which the establishment of posts now affords, the
intelligence is soon spread on every side.
Besides the foregoing reasons, it is necessary for a nation to publish
the declaration of war for the instruction and direction of her own sub-
jects, in order to ﬁx the date of the rights which belong to them from
§53. It is
simple or
conditional.
§54. The right
to make war
ceases on
the offer of
equitable
conditions.
§55. Formali-
ties of a decla-
ration of war.
§56. Other
reasons for the
necessity of its
publication.


chapter iv
503
the moment of this declaration, and in relation to certain effects which
the voluntary law of nations attributes to a war in form. Without such
a public declaration of war, it would, in a treaty of peace, be too difﬁcult
to determine those acts which are to be considered as the effects of war,
and those that each nation may set down as injuries of which she means
to demand reparation. In the last treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle,14 between
France and Spain on the one side, and England on the other, it was
agreed that all the prizes taken before the declaration of war should be
restored. <317>
He who is attacked and only wages defensive war, needs not to make
any hostile declaration,—the state of warfare being sufﬁciently ascer-
tained by the enemy’s declaration or open hostilities. In modern times,
however, the sovereign who is attacked, seldom omits to declare war in
his turn, whether from an idea of dignity, or for the direction of his
subjects.
If the nation on whom we have determined to make war will not
admit any minister or herald to declare it,—whatever the custom may
otherwise be, we may content ourselves with publishing the declaration
of hostilities within our own territories, or on the frontier; and if the
declaration does not come to the knowledge of that nation before hos-
tilities are commenced, she can only blame herself. The Turks imprison
and maltreat even the embassadors of those powers with whom they are
determined to come to a rupture: it would be a perilous undertaking for
a herald to go and declare war against them in their own country. Their
savage disposition, therefore, supercedes the necessity of sending one.
But no person being exempted from his duty for the sole reason that
another has been wanting in his, we are not to omit declaringwaragainst
a nation previous to a commencement of hostilities, because thatnation
has on a former occasion attacked us without any declaration. That na-
tion, in so doing, has violated the law of nature (§51); and her fault does
not authorise us to commit a similar one.
The law of nations does not impose the obligation of declaring war,
with a view to give the enemy time to prepare for an unjust defence.The
14. Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, 1748.
§57. Defensive
war requires
no declaration.
§58. When
it may be
omitted in an
offensive war.
§59. It is not
to be omitted
by way of
retaliation.
§60. Time of
the declaration.

504
book iii: of war
declaration, therefore, need not be made till the army has reached the
frontiers; it is even lawful to delay it till we have entered the enemy’s
territories, and there possessed ourselves of an advantageous post: it
must, however, necessarily precede the commission of any act of hos-
tility. For thus we provide for our own safety, and equally attain the ob-
ject of a declaration of war, which is, to give an unjust adversary the
opportunity of seriously considering his past conduct, and avoiding the
horrors of war, by doing justice. Such was the conduct of that generous
prince, Henry the Fourth, towards CharlesEmanueldukeof Savoy,who
had wearied his patience by vain and fraudulent negotiations.*15
If he who enters a country with an army kept under strict discipline,
declares to the inhabitants that he does not come as an enemy, that he
will commit no violence, and will acquaint the sovereign with the cause
of his coming,—the inhabitants are not to attack him; and should they
dare to attempt it, he has a right to chastise them. But they are not to
admit him into any strong-holds, nor can he demand admission. It is
not the business of subjects to commence hostilitieswithoutordersfrom
their sovereign: but if they are brave and loyal, they will in the <318>
mean time seize on all the advantageous posts, and defend themselves
against any attempt made to dislodge them.
After a declaration of war on the part of the sovereign who has thus
invaded the country, if equitable conditions are not offered himwithout
delay, he may commence his operations: for, I repeat it, he is under no
obligation to suffer himself to be amused. But, at the same time, we are
never to lose sight of the principles before laid down (§§26 and 51) con-
cerningtheonlylegitimatecausesof war.Tomarchanarmyintoaneigh-
bouring country by which we are not threatened, and without having
endeavoured to obtain, by reason and justice, an equitablereparationfor
the wrongs of which we complain, would be introducing a mode preg-
nant with evils to mankind, and sapping the foundations of the safety
* See Sully’s Memoirs.
15. Between 1588 and 1593, Charles Emmanuel I took Saluzzo from France and
after the murder of Henry III (1589) sent troops into France to assert his own claims
to the throne against Henry IV (r. 1589–1610).
§61. Duty of
the inhabitants
on a foreign
army’s enter-
ing a country
before a decla-
ration of war.
§62.
Commence-
ment of
hostilities.


chapter iv
505
and tranquillity of states. If this mode of proceeding be not exploded
and proscribed by the public indignation and the concurrence of every
civilised people, it will become necessary to continue always in amilitary
posture, and to keep ourselves constantly on our guard, no less in times
of profound peace, than during the existence of declared and open war.
The sovereign declaring war can neither detain the persons nor the
property of those subjects of the enemy who are within his dominions
at the time of the declaration. They came into his country under the
public faith. By permitting them to enter and reside in his territories, he
tacitly promised them full liberty and security for their return. He is
therefore bound to allow them a reasonable time for withdrawing with
their effects; and if they stay beyond the term prescribed, he has a right
to treat them as enemies,—as unarmed enemies, however. But if they
are detained by an insurmountable impediment, as by sickness, he must
necessarily, and for the same reasons, grant them a sufﬁcient extension
of the term. At present, so far from beingwantinginthisduty,sovereigns
carry their attention to humanity still farther, so that foreigners, who are
subjects of the state against which war is declared, are very frequently
allowed full time for the settlement of their affairs. This is observed in
a particular manner with regard to merchants; and the case is moreover
carefully provided for, in commercial treaties. The king of England has
done more than this. In his last declaration of war against France, he
ordained that all French subjects who were in his dominions, should be
at liberty to remain, and be perfectly secure in their persons and effects,
“provided they demeaned themselves properly.”
We have said (§56) that a sovereign is to make the declaration of war
public within his dominions, for the information and direction of his
subjects. He is also to make known his declaration of war to the neutral
powers, in order to acquaint them with the justiﬁcatory reasons which
authorise it,—the cause which obliges him to take up arms,—and to
notify to them that such or such a nation is his enemy, that they may
conduct themselves accordingly. We shall even see that this is necessary
in <319> order to obviate all difﬁculty, when we come to treat of the
right to seize certain things which neutral persons are carrying to the
enemy, and of what is termed contraband in time of war. This publi-
§63. Conduct
to be observed
towards the
subjects of an
enemy, who
are in the
country at the
time of the
declaration
of war.
§64. Publica-
tion of the
war, and
manifestoes.


506
book iii: of war
cation of the war may be called declaration, and that which is notiﬁed
directly to the enemy, denunciation; and indeed the Latin term is den-
unciatio belli.
War is at present published and declared by manifestoes. Thesepieces
never fail to contain the justiﬁcatory reasons, good or bad, on which the
party grounds his right to take up arms. The least scrupulous sovereign
would wish to be thought just, equitable, and a lover of peace: he is
sensible that a contrary reputation might be detrimental to him. The
manifesto implying a declaration of war, or the declaration itself,
printed, published, and circulated throughout the whole state, contains
also the sovereign’s general orders to his subjects relativetotheirconduct
in the war.*
In so civilised an age, it may be unnecessary to observe, that, in those
pieces which are published on the subject of war, it is proper to abstain
from every opprobrious expression, indicative of hatred, animosity, and
rage, and only calculated to excite similar sentiments in the bosom of
the enemy. A prince ought to preserve the most digniﬁed decorum,both
in his words and in his writings. He ought to respect himself in the
person of his equals: and though it is his misfortune to be at variance
with a nation, shall he inﬂame the quarrel by offensive expressions, and
thus deprive himself even of the hopes of a sincere reconciliation? Ho-
mer’s heroes call each other “dog” and “drunkard”: but this was perfectly
in character, since, in their enmity, they knew no bounds. Frederic Bar-
barossa, and other emperors, and the popes their enemies, treated each
other with as little delicacy. Let us congratulate our age on the superior
gentleness of its manners, and not give the name of unmeaning polite-
ness to those attentions which are productive of real and substantial
effects.
* It is remarked, as a very singular circumstance, that Charles the Second, king of
Great Britain, in his declaration of war against France, dated February 9,1668,prom-
ised security to French subjects who should “demean themselvesproperly,”—andmore-
over his protection and favour to such of them as might chuse to emigrate to his
dominions. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§65. Decorum
and modera-
tion to be
observed in the
manifestoes.


chapter i
Of Peace, and the Obligation to cultivate it.
Sect. 1. What peace is,
page 429
2. Obligation of cultivating it,
430
3. The sovereign’s obligation in that respect,
430
4. Extent of that duty,
430
5. Disturbers of the public peace,
431
6. How far war may be continued,
431
7. Peace the end of war,
432
8. General effects of peace,
432
chapter ii
Treaties of Peace.
9. Deﬁnition of a treaty of peace,
432
10. By whom it may be concluded,
432
11. Alienations made by a treaty of peace,
433
12. How the sovereign may, in a treaty, dispose of what
concerns individuals,
435
13. Whether a king who is a prisoner of war, can
make a peace,
435
14. Whether peace can be made with a usurper,
436
15. Allies included in the treaty of peace,
436
16. Associates to treat, each for himself,
437
17. Mediation,
437
18. On what footing peace may be concluded,
437
19. General effect of the treaty of peace,
438
20. Amnesty,
439
21. Things not mentioned in the treaty,
439
22. Things not included in the compromise or amnesty,
439
23. Former treaties, mentioned or conﬁrmed in the
new, are a part of it,
440


original contents
61
chapter iii
Of the Execution of the Treaty of Peace.
Sect. 24. When the obligation of the
treaty commences,
page 440
25. Publication of the peace,
440
26. Time of the execution,
441
27. A lawful excuse to be admitted,
441
28. The promise is void when the party to whom it was
made has himself hindered the performance of it,
441
29. Cessation of contributions,
442
30. Products of the thing restored or ceded,
442
31. In what condition things are to be restored, <lii>
442
32. The interpretation of a treaty of peace is to be
against the superior party,
443
33. Names of ceded countries,
443
34. Restoration not to be understood of those who have
voluntarily given themselves up,
444
chapter iv
Of the Observance and Breach of the
Treaty of Peace.
35. The treaty of peace binds the nation and successors,
444
36. It is to be faithfully observed,
444
37. The plea of fear or force does not dispense with the
observance,
445
38. How many ways a treaty of peace may be broken,
446
39. by a conduct contrary to the nature of every treaty
of peace,
446
40. To take up arms for a fresh cause is no breach of the
treaty of peace,
446
41. A subsequent alliance with an enemy is likewise no
breach of the treaty,
447
42. Why a distinction is to be made between a new war
and a breach of the treaty,
447
43. Justiﬁable self-defence is no breach of the treaty,
448
44. Causes of rupture on account of allies,
449
45. The treaty is broken by what is contrary to its
particular nature,
449
46. by the violation of any article,
449


62
original contents
Sect. 47. The violation of a single article breaks the
whole treaty,
page 449
48. Whether a distinction may here be made
between the more and the less important articles,
450
49. Penalty annexed to the violation of an article,
450
50. Studied delays,
450
51. Unsurmountable impediments,
450
52. Infractions of the treaty of peace by the subjects,
451
53. or by allies,
451
54. Right of the offended party against him who has
violated the treaty,
452
chapter v
Of the Right of Embassy, or the Right of sending
and receiving public Ministers.
55. It is necessary that nations be enabled to treat and
communicate together,
452
56. They do that by the agency of public ministers,
453
57. Every sovereign state has a right to send and receive
public ministers,
453
58. An unequal alliance, or a treaty of protection, does
not take away that right,
453
59. Right of the princes and states of the empire in
that respect,
453
60. Cities that have the right of banner,
454
61. Ministers of viceroys, <liii>
455
62. Ministers of the nation or of the regents during
an interregnum,
455
63. Sovereign molesting another in the exercise of the
right of embassy,
455
64. What is allowable in that respect in time of war,
455
65. The minister of a friendly power is to be received,
456
66. Resident ministers,
456
67. Admission of an enemy’s ministers,
457
68. Whether ministers may be received from or sent to
a usurper,
457

original contents
63
chapter iv
507
Those formalities of which the necessity is deducible from the prin-
ciples and the very nature of war, are the characteristics of a lawful war
in due form (justum bellum). Grotius says,* that, according to the law
of nations, two things are requisite to constitute a solemn or formal
war—ﬁrst, that it be, on both sides, made by the sovereign authority,—
secondly, that itbeaccompaniedbycertainformalities.Theseformalities
consist in the demand of a just satisfaction (rerum repetitio), and in the
declaration of war, at least on the part of him who attacks;—for defen-
sive war requires no declaration (§57), nor even, on urgent occasions, an
express order from the sovereign. In effect, these <320> two conditions
are necessarily required in every war which shall, according to the law
of nations, be a legitimate one, that is to say, such a war as nations have
a right to wage. The right of making war belongs only to the sovereign
(§4); and it is only after satisfaction has been refused to him (§37), and
even after he has made a declaration of war (§51), that he has a right to
take up arms.
A war in due form is also called a regular war, because certain rules,
either prescribed by the law of nature, or adopted by custom, are ob-
served in it.
Legitimate and formal warfare must be carefully distinguished from
those illegitimate and informal wars, or rather predatory expeditions,
undertaken, either without lawful authority, or without apparent cause,
as likewise without the usual formalities, and solely with a view to plun-
der. Grotius relates several instances of the latter.† Such were the enter-
prises of the grandes compagnies which had assembled in France during
the wars with the English,—armies of banditti, who ranged about Eu-
rope, purely for spoil and plunder: such were the cruises of the bucca-
neers, without commission, and in time of peace; and such in general
are the depredations of pirates. To the same class belong almost all the
expeditions of the Barbary corsairs: though authorised by a sovereign,
they are undertaken without any apparent cause, and from no othermo-
tive than the lust of plunder. These two species of war, I say,—thelawful
* De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. i. cap. iii. §4.
† Lib. iii. cap. iv [[Law of War and Peace]].
§66. What is a
lawful war in
due form.
§67. It is to be
distinguished
from informal
and unlawful
war.


508
book iii: of war
and the illegitimate,—are to be carefully distinguished, as theeffectsand
the rights arising from each are very different.
In order fully to conceive the grounds of this distinction, it is nec-
essary to recollect the nature and object of lawful war. It is only as the
last remedy against obstinate injustice that the law of nature allows of
war.Hencearisetherightswhichitgives,asweshallexplaininthesequel:
hence likewise the rules to be observed in it. Since it is equally possible
that either of the parties may have right on his side,—and since, in con-
sequence of the independence of nations, that point is not to be decided
by others (§40),—the condition of the two enemies is the same, while
the war lasts. Thus, when a nation or a sovereign has declaredwaragainst
another sovereign on account of a difference arisen between them, their
war is what among nations is called a lawful and formal war; and its
effects are, by the voluntary law of nations, the same on both sides, in-
dependently of the justice of the cause, as we shall more fully shew in
the sequel.* Nothing of this kind is the case in an informal and illegit-
imate war, which is more properly called depredation.Undertakenwith-
out any right, without even an apparent cause, it can be productive of
no lawful effect, nor give any right to the author of it. A nation attacked
by such sort of enemies is not under any obligation to observe towards
them the rules prescribed in formal war-<321>fare. She may treat them
as robbers. The inhabitants of Geneva, after defeating the famous at-
tempt to take their city by escalade,† caused all the prisoners whom they
took from the Savoyards on that occasion, to be hanged up as robbers,
who had come to attack them without cause and without a declaration
of war. Nor were the Genevese censured for this proceeding, which
would have been detested in a formal war.
* See chap. xii. of this book.
† In the year 1602.
§68. Grounds
of this dis-
tinction.


chapter v
509
chapter v
Of the Enemy, and of Things
belonging to the Enemy.
The enemy is he with whom a nation is at open war. The Latins had a
particular term (Hostis)todenoteapublicenemy,anddistinguishedhim
from a private enemy (Inimicus). Our language affords but one word for
these two classes of persons, who ought nevertheless to be carefully dis-
tinguished. A private enemy is one who seeks to hurt us, and takes plea-
sure in the evil that befalls us. A public enemy forms claims against us,
or rejects ours, and maintains his real or pretended rights by force of
arms. The former is never innocent; he fosters rancour and hatred in his
heart. It is possible that the public enemy may be free from such odious
sentiments, that he does not wish us ill, and only seeks to maintain his
rights. This observation is necessary in order to regulate the dispositions
of our heart towards a public enemy.
When the sovereign or ruler of the state declares war against another
sovereign, it is understood that the whole nation declares war against
another nation: for the sovereign represents the nation, and acts in the
name of the whole society (Book I. §§40, 41); and it is only in a body,
and in her national character, that one nation has to do with another.
Hence, these two nations are enemies, and all the subjects of the one are
enemies to all the subjects of the other. In this particular, custom and
principles are in accord.
Enemies continue such, wherever they happen to be. The place of
abode is of no consequence here. It is the political ties which determine
the character. Whilst a man continues a citizen of his own country, he
is the enemy of all those with whom his nation is at war. But we must
not hence conclude that these enemies may treat each other as such,
wherever they happen to meet. Every one being master in his respective
country, a neutral prince will not allow them to use any violence in his
territories.
§69. Who is
an enemy.
§70. All the
subjects of the
two states
at war are
enemies,
§71. and
continue to
be enemies in
all places.

510
book iii: of war
Since women and children are subjects of the state, and mem-
<322>bers of the nation, they are to be ranked in the class of enemies.
But it does not thence follow that we are justiﬁable in treating them like
men who bear arms, or are capable of bearing them. It will appear in
the sequel, that we have not the same rights against all classesof enemies.
When once we have precisely determined who our enemies are, it is
easy to know what are the things belonging to the enemy (res hostiles).
We have shewn that not only the sovereign with whom we are at war is
an enemy, but also his whole nation, even the very women and children.
Every thing, therefore, which belongs to that nation,—to the state, to
the sovereign, to the subjects, of whatever age or sex,—every thing of
that kind, I say, falls under the description of things belonging to the
enemy.
And, with respect to things, the case is the same as with respect to
persons:—things belonging to the enemy continue such wherever they
are. But we are not hence to conclude, any more than in the case of
persons (§71), that we every-where possess a right to treat those things
as things belonging to the enemy.
Since it is not the place where a thing is, which determines the nature
of that thing, but the character of the person to whom it belongs,—
things belonging to neutral persons, which happen to be in an enemy’s
country or on board an enemy’s ships, are to be distinguishedfromthose
which belong to the enemy. But it is the owner’s business to adduce
evident proof that they are his property: for, in default of such proof, a
thing is naturally presumed to belong to the nation in whose possession
it is found.
The preceding section relates to movable property: but the rule is dif-
ferent with respect to immovable possessions, such as landed estates.
Since all these do in some measure belong to the nation, are part of its
domain, of its territory, and under its government (Book I. §§204, 235,
Book II. §114)—and since the owner is still a subject of the country as
possessor of a landed estate,—property of this kind does not cease to be
enemy’s property (res hostiles), though possessed by a neutral foreigner.
Nevertheless, war being now carried on with so much moderation and
§72. Whether
women and
children are to
be accounted
enemies.
§73. Things
belonging to
the enemy
§74. continue
such every-
where.
§75. Neutral
things found
with an enemy.
§76. Lands
possessed by
foreigners in
an enemy’s
country.


chapter v
511
indulgence, protections are granted for houses and lands possessed by
foreigners in an enemy’s country. For the same reason, he who declares
war does not conﬁscate the immovable property possessedinhiscountry
by his enemy’s subjects. By permitting them to purchase and possess
such property, he has in that respect admitted them into the number of
his subjects. But the income may be sequestrated, in order to prevent its
being remitted to the enemy’s country.
Among the things belonging to the enemy, are likewise incorporeal
things,—all his rights, claims, and debts, excepting however those kind
of rights granted by a third party, and in which the grantor is so far
concerned, that it is not a matter of indiffe-<323>rence to him, in what
hands they are vested. Such, for instance, are the rights of commerce.
But as debts are not of this number, war gives us the same rights over
any sums of money due by neutral nations to our enemy, as it can give
over his other property.
When Alexander, by conquest, became absolute master of Thebes,
he remitted to the Thessalians a hundred talents which they owed to the
Thebans.* The sovereign has naturally the same right over what his sub-
jects may owe to enemies. He may therefore conﬁscate debts of this na-
ture, if the term of payment happen in the time of war; or at least he
may prohibit his subjects from paying while the war continues. But at
present, a regard to the advantage and safety of commerce has induced
all the sovereigns of Europe to act with less rigour in this point. And as
the custom has been generally received, he who should act contrary to
it, would violate the public faith; for strangers trusted his subjects only
from a ﬁrm persuasion that the general custom would be observed. The
state does not so much as touch the sums which it owes to the enemy:
money lent to the public is every-where exempt from conﬁscation and
seizure in case of war.
* Grotius, de Jure Belli & Pacis, lib. iii. cap. viii. §4.
§77. Things
due to the
enemy by a
third party.


512
book iii: of war
chapter vi
Of the Enemy’s Allies—of warlike Associations—
of Auxiliaries and Subsidies.
We have sufﬁciently spoken of treaties in general, and shall here touch
on this subject only in its particular relations to war. Treaties relating to
war are of several kinds, and vary in their objects and clauses, according
to the will of those who make them. Besides applying to them all that
we have said of treaties in general (Book II. Ch. XII. &c.), they mayalso
be divided into treaties real and personal, equal and unequal, &c. But
they have also their speciﬁc differences, viz. those which relate to their
particular object, war.
Under this relation, alliances made for warlike purposes are divided
in general into defensive and offensive alliances. In the former, the na-
tion engages only to defend her ally in case he be attacked: in the latter,
she unites with him for the purpose of making an attack,—of jointly
waging war against another nation. Some alliances are both offensive
and defensive; and there seldom is an offensive alliance which is not
also a defensive one. But it is very usual for alliances to be purely de-
fensive: and these are in general the most natural and lawful. It would
be <324> a tedious and even a useless task to enumerate in detail all
the varieties incident to such alliances. Some are made, without re-
striction, against all opponents: in others, certain states are excepted:
others again are formed against such or such a nation expressly men-
tioned by name.
But a difference, of great importance to be observed, especially in
defensive alliances, is that between an intimate and complete alliance,
in which we agree to a union of interests,—and another, in which we
only promise a stated succour. The alliance in which we agree to a union
of interests, is awarlike association: eachof thepartiesactswithhiswhole
force; all the allies become principals in the war; they have the same
friends and the same enemies. But an alliance of this nature is more
particularly termed a warlike association, when it is offensive.
§78. Treaties
relative to war.
§79. Defensive
and offensive
alliances.
§80. Differ-
ence between
warlike associ-
ations and
auxiliary
treaties.


chapter vi
513
When a sovereign, without directly taking part in the war made by
another sovereign, only sends him succours of troops or ships, these are
called auxiliaries.
The auxiliary troops serve the princetowhomtheyaresent,according
to their sovereign’s orders. If they are purely and simply sent without
restriction, they are to serve equally on the offensive and the defensive;
and, fortheparticularsof theiroperations,theyaretoobeythedirections
of the prince to whose assistance they come. Yet this prince has not the
free and entire disposal of them, as of his own subjects: they are granted
to him only for his own wars; and he has no right to transfer them, as
auxiliaries, to a third power.
Sometimes this succour from a potentate who does not directly take
part in the war, consists in money; and then it is called a subsidy. This
term is now often taken in another sense, and signiﬁes a sum of money
annually paid by one sovereign to another, in return forabodyof troops,
which the latter furnishes to the other to carry on his wars, or keeps in
readiness for his service. The treaties for procuring such a resource are
called subsidiary treaties. France and England have at present such trea-
ties existing withseveral of thenorthernpowersandprincesinGermany,
and continue them even in times of peace.
In order, now, to judge of the morality of these several treaties or
alliances,—of their legitimacy according to the law of nations,—we
must, in the ﬁrst place, lay down this incontrovertible principle, that It
is lawful and commendable to succour and assist, by all possible means, a
nation engaged in a just war; and it is even a duty incumbent on every
nation, to give such assistance, when she can give it without injury to herself.
But no assistance whatever is to be afforded to him who is engaged in an
unjust war. There is nothing in this which is not demonstrated by what
we have said of the common duties of nations towards each other
(Book II. Ch. I.). To support the cause of justice when we are able, is
always commendable: but, in assisting the unjust, we partake of his
crime, and become, like him, guilty of injustice.
If, to the principle we have now laid down, you add the consi-
<325>deration of what a nation owes to her own safety, and of the care
which it is so natural and so ﬁt that she should take to put herself in a
§81. Auxiliary
troops.
§82. Subsidies.
§83. When
a nation is
allowed to
assist another,
§84. and to
make alliances
for war.


514
book iii: of war
condition to resist her enemies, you will the more readily perceive how
clear a right a nation has to make warlike alliances, and especially de-
fensive alliances, whose sole tendency is to maintain all parties in the
quiet and secure possession of their property.
But great circumspection is to be used in forming such alliances. En-
gagements by which a nation may be drawn into a war at a moment
when she least expects it, ought not to be contracted without very im-
portant reasons, and a direct view to the welfare of the state. We here
speak of alliances made in time of peace, and by way of precaution
against future contingencies.
If there be question of contracting an alliance with a nation already
engaged in a war or on the point of engaging in one, two things are to
be considered,—1. The justice of that nation’s quarrel. 2. The welfare
of the state. If the war which a prince wages or is preparing to wage, be
unjust, it is not allowable to form an alliance with him; for injustice is
not to be supported. If he is justiﬁable in taking up arms, it still remains
to be considered whether the welfare of the state allows or requires us
to embark in his quarrel: for it is only with a view to the welfare of the
state that the sovereign ought to use his authority: tothatallhismeasures
should tend, and especially those of the most important nature. What
other consideration can authorise him to expose his people to the calam-
ities of war?
As it is only for the support of a just war that we are allowed to give
assistance or contract alliances,—every alliance, every warlike associa-
tion, every auxiliary treaty, contracted by way of anticipation in time of
peace, and with no view to any particular war, necessarily and of itself
includes this tacit clause, that the treaty shall not be obligatory except
in case of a just war. On any other footing, the alliance could not be
validly contracted. (Book II. §§161, 168.)
But care must be taken that treaties of alliance be not therebyreduced
to empty and delusive formalities. The tacit restriction is to be under-
stood only of a war which is evidently unjust; for otherwise a pretence
for eluding treaties would never be wanting. Is there question of con-
tracting an alliance with a power actually at war?—It behoves you most
religiously to weigh the justice of his cause: the judgment dependssolely
§85. Alliances
made with a
nation actually
engaged in
war.
§86. Tacit
clause in
every warlike
alliance.


chapter vi
515
on you, since you owe him no assistance any farther than as his quarrel
is just, and your own circumstances make it convenient for you to em-
bark in it. But when once engaged, nothing less than the manifest in-
justice of his cause can excuse you from assisting him. In a doubtfulcase,
you are to presume that your ally has justice on his side;—that being his
concern.
But if you entertain strong doubts, you may very fairly and com-
mendably interpose to effect an accommodation. Thusyoumaybringthe
justice of the cause to the test of evidence, by dis-<326>covering which
of the contending parties refuses to accede to equitable conditions.
As every alliance implies the tacit clause above-mentioned, he who
refuses to succour his ally in a war that is manifestly unjust, isnotcharge-
able with a breach of alliance.
When alliances have thus been contracted beforehand, the question
is to determine, in the course of events, those cases in which our en-
gagements come in force, and we are bound to act in consequence of
the alliance. This is what is called casus foederis, or case of the alliance,
and is to bediscovered intheconcurrenceof thecircumstancesforwhich
the treaty has been made, whether those circumstances have been ex-
pressly speciﬁed in it, or tacitly supposed. Whatever has been promised
in the treaty of alliance, is due in the casus foederis, and not otherwise.
As the most solemn treaties cannot oblige any one to favour an unjust
quarrel (§86), the casus foederis never takes place in a war that is mani-
festly unjust.
In a defensive alliance, the casus foederis does not exist immediately
on our ally being attacked. It is still our duty to examine whether he has
not given his enemy just cause to make war against him: for we cannot
have engaged to undertake his defence with the view of enabling him
to insult others, or to refuse them justice. If he is in the wrong, we must
induce him to offer a reasonable satisfaction; and if his enemy will not
be contented with it,—then, and not till then, the obligation of de-
fending him commences.
But if the defensive alliance contains a guarantee of all the territories
at that time possessed by the ally, the casus foederis immediately takes
place whenever those territories are invaded or threatened with an in-
§87. To refuse
succours for an
unjust war, is
no breach of
alliance.
§88. What
the casus
foederis is.
§89. It never
takes place in
an unjust war.
§90. How
it exists in a
defensive war,
§91. and in
a treaty of
guarantee.

516
book iii: of war
vasion. If they are attacked for a just cause, we must prevail on our ally
to give satisfaction; but we may on good grounds oppose his being de-
prived of his possessions, as it is generally with a view toourownsecurity
that we undertake to guaranty them. On the whole, the rules of inter-
pretation, which we have given in an express chapter,* are to be con-
sulted, in order to determine, on particular occasions, the existence of
the casus foederis.
If the state that has promised succours ﬁnds herself unable to furnish
them, her inability alone is sufﬁcient to dispense with the obligation:
and if she cannot give her assistance without exposing herself to evident
danger, this circumstance also dispenses with it. This would be one of
those cases in which a treaty becomes pernicious to the state, and there-
fore not obligatory (Book II. §160). But we here speak of an imminent
danger, threatening the very existence of the state. The case of such a
danger is tacitly and necessarily reserved in every treaty. As to remote
dangers, or those of no extraordinary magnitude,—sincethey<327>are
inseparable from every military alliance, it would be absurd to pretend
that they should create an exception: and the sovereign may expose the
nation to them in consideration of the advantages which she reaps from
the alliance.
In virtue of these principles, we are absolved from the obligation of
sending assistance to an ally while we are ourselves engaged in a war
which requires our whole strength. If we are able to oppose our own
enemies, and to assist our ally at the same time, no reason can be pleaded
for such dispensation. But, in such cases, it rests with ourselves to de-
termine what our circumstances and strength will allow. It is the same
with other things which may have been promised, as, for instance, pro-
visions. There is no obligation to furnish an ally with them when we
want them for our own use.
We forbear to repeat in this place what we have said of various other
cases in discoursing of treaties in general, as, for example, of the pref-
erence due to the more ancient ally (Book II. §167), and to a protector
(ibid. §204), of the meaning to be annexed to the term “allies,” in atreaty
* Book ii. ch. xvii.
§92. The
succour is not
due under an
inability to
furnish it, or
when the
public safety
would be
exposed.
§93. Other
cases.


chapter vi
517
in which they are reserved (ibid. §309). Let us only add, on this lastques-
tion, that, in a warlike alliance made against all opponents, the allies ex-
cepted, this exception is to be understood only of the present allies.Oth-
erwise it would afterwards be easy to elude the former treaty by new
alliances; and it would be impossible for us to know either what we are
doing in concluding such a treaty, or what we gain by it.
A case which we have not spoken of is this:—Three powers have en-
tered into a treaty of defensive alliance: two of them quarrel, and make
war on each other:—how is the third to act? The treaty does not bind
him to assist either the one or the other. For it would be absurd to say
that he has promised his assistance to each against the other, or to one
of the two in prejudice of the other. The only obligation, therefore,
which the treaty imposes on him, is, to endeavour, by the interposition
of his good ofﬁces, to effect a reconciliation between his allies: and if
hismediationprovesunsuccessful,heremainsatlibertytoassisttheparty
who appears to have justice on his side.
To refuse an ally the succours due to him, without having any just
cause to allege for such refusal, is doing him an injury, since it is a vio-
lation of the perfect right which we gave him by a formal engagement.
I speak of evident cases, it being then only that the right is perfect; for,
in those of a doubtful nature, it rests with each party to judge what he
is able to do (§92): but he is to judge maturely and impartially, and to
act with candor. And as it is an obligation naturally incumbent on us,
to repair any damage caused by our fault, and especially by our injustice,
we are bound to indemnify an ally for all the losses hemayhavesustained
in consequence of our unjust refusal. How much circumspectionthere-
fore is to be used in forming engagements, which we cannot refuse to
fulﬁl without material injury to our affairs or our <328> honour, and
which, on the other hand, if complied with, may be productive of the
most serious consequences!
An engagement which may draw us into a war is of great moment:
in it, the very existence of the state is at stake. He who in an alliance
promises a subsidy or a body of auxiliaries, sometimes imagines that he
only risks a sum of money or a certain number of soldiers; whereas he
often exposes himself to war and all its calamities. The nation against
Two of the
parties in
an alliance
coming to
a rupture.
§94. Refusal of
the succours
due in virtue
of an alliance.
§95. The
enemy’s
associates.


518
book iii: of war
whom he furnishes assistance will look upon him as her enemy; and
should her arms prove successful, she will carry the war into his country.
But it remains to be determined whether she can do this with justice,
and on what occasions. Some authors* decide in general, that whoever
joins our enemy, or assists him against us with money, troops, or in any
other manner whatever, becomes thereby our enemy, and gives us a right
to make war against him:—a cruel decision, and highly inimical to the
peace of nations! It cannot be supported by principles; and happily the
practice of Europe stands in opposition to it.
It is true, indeed, that every associate of my enemy is himself my
enemy. It is of little consequence whether any one makes war on me
directly, and in his own name, or under the auspices of another. What-
ever rights war gives me against my principal enemy, the like it gives me
against all his associates: for I derive those rights from the right to se-
curity,—from the care of my own defence; and I am equally attacked
by the one and the other party. But the question is, to know whom I
may lawfully account my enemy’s associates, united against me in war.
First, in that class I shall rank all those who are really united in a
warlike association with my enemy, and whomakeacommoncausewith
him, though it is only in the name of that principal enemy that the war
is carried on. There is no need of proving this. In the ordinary and open
warlike associations, the war is carried on in the name of all the allies,
who are all equally enemies (§80).
In the second place, I account as associates of my enemy, those who
assist him in his war without being obliged to it by any treaty. Since they
freely and voluntarily declare against me, they, of their own accord,
chuse to become my enemies. If they go no farther than furnishing a
determined succour, allowing some troops to be raised, or advancing
money,—and, in other respects, preserve towards me the accustomed
relations of friendship or neutrality,—I may overlook that ground of
complaint; but still I have a right to call them to account for it. This
prudent caution, of not always coming to an open rupture with those
who give such assistance to our enemy, that we may not force them to
* See Wolf, Jus Gentium, §§730 and 736.
§96. Those
who make
a common
cause with the
enemy, are his
associates;
§97. and those
who assist him,
without being
obliged to it by
treaties;


chapter vi
519
join him with all their strength,—this forbearance, I say, has gradually
introduced the custom of not looking on such assistance as an act of
hostility, especially when it consists only in <329> the permission to en-
list volunteers. How often have the Switzers granted levies to France, at
the same time that they refused such an indulgence to the house of Aus-
tria, though both powers were in alliance with them! How often have
they allowed one prince to levy troops in their country, and refused the
same permissiontohis enemy,whentheywerenotinalliancewitheither!
They granted or denied that favour according as they judged it most
expedient for themselves; and no power has ever dared to attack them
on that account. But if prudence dissuades us from making use of all
our right, it does not thereby destroy that right. A cautiousnationchuses
rather to overlook certain points than unnecessarily to increasethenum-
ber of her enemies.
Thirdly, those who, being united with my enemy by an offensive al-
liance, actively assist him in the war which he declares against me,—
those, I say, concur in the injury intended against me. They shew them-
selves my enemies, and I have a right to treat them as such. Accordingly
the Switzers, whose example we have above quoted, seldom grant troops
except for defensive war. To those in the service of France, it has ever
been a standing order from their sovereigns, not to carry arms against
the empire, or against the states of the house of Austria in Germany. In
1644, the captains of the Neufchatel regiment of Guy, on information
that they were destined to serve under marshal Turenne in Germany,
declared that they would rather die than disobey their sovereign, and
violate the alliances of the Helvetic body. Since France has been mistress
of Alsace, the Switzers who serve in her armies, never pass the Rhine to
attack the empire. The gallant Daxelhoffer, captain of a Berne company
in the French service, consisting of 200 men, and of which his four sons
formed the ﬁrst rank, seeing the general would oblige him to pass the
Rhine, broke his espontoon, and marched back with his company to
Berne.
Even a defensive alliance made expressly against me, or (which
amounts to the same thing) concluded with my enemy during the war,
or on the certain prospect of its speedy declaration, is an act of associ-
§98. or who
are in an offen-
sive alliance
with him.
§99. How a
defensive alli-
ance associates
with the enemy.


520
book iii: of war
ation against me; and if followed by effects, I may look on the party who
has contracted it, as my enemy. The case is here precisely the same as
that of a nation assisting my enemy without being under any obligation
to do so, and chusing of her own accord to become my enemy. (See §97.)
A defensive alliance, though of a general nature, and made beforeany
appearance of the present war, produces also the same effect, if it stip-
ulates the assistance of the whole strength of the allies: for in this case
it is a real league or warlike association; and, besides, it were absurd that
I should be debarred from making war on a nation who opposes mewith
all her might, and thus exhausting the source of those succours with
which she furnishes my enemy. In what light am I to consider an aux-
iliary who comes to make war on me at the head of all his forces? It
would be mockery on hispart, to pretendthatheisnotmy<330>enemy.
What more could he do, were he openly to declare himself such? He
shews no tenderness for me on the occasion: he only wishes that a tender
regard should be paid to himself. And shall I suffer him to preserve his
provinces in peace, and secure from all danger, whilst he is doing me all
the mischief in his power? No! the law of nature, the law of nations,
obliges us to be just, but does not condemn us to be dupes.
But if a defensive alliance has not been made against me in particular,
nor concluded at the time when I was openly preparing for war, or had
already begun it,—and if the allies have only stipulated in it, that each
of them shall furnish a stated succour to him who shall be attacked,—
I cannot require that they should neglect to fulﬁl a solemn treaty, which
they had an unquestionable right to conclude without any injury to me.
In furnishing my enemy with assistance, they only acquit themselves of
a debt: they do me no wrong in discharging it; and consequently they
afford me no just grounds for making war on them (§26). Neither can
I say that my safety obliges me to attack them; for I should thereby only
increase the number of my enemies, and, instead of a slender succour
which they furnish against me, should draw on myself the whole power
of those nations. It is, therefore, only the troops which they send as aux-
iliaries, that I am to consider as enemies. These are actually united with
my enemies, and ﬁghting against me.
§100.
Another case.
§101. In what
case it does not
produce the
same effect.


chapter vi
521
The contrary principles would tend to multiply wars, and spread
them beyond all bounds, to the common ruin of nations. It is happy for
Europe, that, in this instance, the established custom is in accord with
the true principles. A prince seldom presumes to complain of a nation’s
contributing to the defence of her ally by furnishing him with succours
which were promised in former treaties,—in treaties that were not made
against that prince in particular. In the last war,16 the United Provinces
long continued to supply the queen of Hungary17 with subsidies, and
even with troops; and France never complained of these proceedingstill
those troops marched into Alsace to attack the French frontier. Switzer-
land, in virtue of her alliance with France, furnishes that crown with
numerous bodies of troops, and, nevertheless, lives in peace with all
Europe.
There is one case, however, which might form an exception to the
general rule: it is that of a defensive war which is evidently unjust. For
in such case there no longer exists any obligation to assist an ally (§§86,
87, 89). If you undertake to do it without necessity, and in violation of
your duty, you do an injury to the enemy, and declare against him out
of mere wantonness. But this is a case that very rarely occurs between
nations. There are few defensive wars without at least some apparent
reason to warrant their justice or necessity. Now, on any dubious occa-
sion, each state is sole judge of the justice of her own cause; and the
presumption is in favour of your ally (§86). Besides, it belongs to you
alone todeterminewhat conductonyourpartwillbe<331>conformable
to your duties and to your engagements; and consequently nothing less
than the most palpable evidence can authorise the enemy of your ally
to charge you with supporting an unjust war, contrary to the conviction
of your own conscience. In ﬁne, the voluntary law of nations ordains,
that, in every case susceptible of doubt, the arms of both parties shall,
with regard to external effects, be accounted equally lawful (§40).
16. War of the Austrian Succession, 1741–48.
17. Maria Theresa, r. 1740–80.

522
book iii: of war
The real associates of my enemy being my enemies, I have against
them the same rights as against the principal enemy (§95). And as their
own conduct proclaims them my enemies, and they take uparmsagainst
me in the ﬁrst instance, I may make war on them without any declara-
tion; the war being sufﬁciently declared by their own act. This is espe-
cially the case of those who in any manner whatever concur to make an
offensive war against me; and it is likewise the case of all those whom
we have mentioned in §§96, 97, 98, 99, 100.
But it is not thus with those nations which assist my enemy in a de-
fensive war: I cannot consider them as his associates (§101). If I am en-
titled to complain of their furnishing him with succours, this is a new
ground of quarrel between me and them. I may expostulate with them,
and, on not receiving satisfaction, prosecute my right, and make war on
them. But in this case there must be a previous declaration (§51). The
example of Manlius, who made war on the Galatians18 for having sup-
plied Antiochus with troops, is not a case in point. Grotius* censuresthe
Roman general for having begun that war without a declaration. The
Galatians, in furnishing troops for an offensive war against the Romans,
had declared themselves enemies to Rome.Itwouldappear,indeed,that,
on peacebeingconcludedwithAntiochus,Manliusoughttohavewaited
for orders from Rome before he attacked the Galatians; and then, if that
expedition was considered as a fresh war, he should have not only issued
a declaration, but also made a demand of satisfaction, previous to the
commencement of hostilities (§51). But the treaty with the king of Syria
had not yet received its consummation: and it concerned that monarch
alone, without makinganymentionof hisadherents.ThereforeManlius
undertook the expedition against the Galatians, as a consequence or a
remnant of the war with Antiochus. This is what he himself very well
observed in his speech to the senate;† and he even added, that his ﬁrst
* De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. iii. cap. iii. §10.
† Livy, lib. xxxviii.
18. Gnaeus Manlius Vulso served as Roman consul in 189 b.c. and defeated the
Galatian Gauls after accusing them of sending troops to support the Seleucids in the
recent Roman-Syrian war.
§102. Whether
it be necessary
to declare war
against the
enemy’s
associates.


chapter vii
523
measure was to try whether he could bring the Galatians to reasonable
terms. Grotius more appositely quotes the example of Ulysses and his
followers,—blaming them for having, without any declaration of war,
attacked the Ciconians, who had sent succours to Priam during thesiege
of Troy.* <332>
chapter vii
Of Neutrality—and the Passage of Troops
through a Neutral Country.
Neutral nations are those who, in time of war, do not take any part in
the contest, but remain common friends to both parties, without fa-
vouring the arms of the one to the prejudice of the other. Here we are
to consider the obligations and rights ﬂowing from neutrality.
In order rightly to understand this question, we must avoid con-
founding what may lawfully be done by a nation that is free from all
engagements, with what she may do if she expects to be treated as per-
fectly neutral in a war. As long as a neutral nationwishessecurelytoenjoy
the advantages of her neutrality, she must in all things shew a strict im-
partiality towards the belligerent powers: for, should she favour one of
the parties to the prejudice of the other, she cannot complain of being
treated by him as an adherent and confederate of his enemy. Her neu-
trality would be a fraudulent neutrality, of which no nation will consent
to be the dupe. It is sometimes suffered to pass unnoticed, merely for
want of ability to resent it; we chuse to connive at it, rather than excite
a more powerful opposition against us. But the present question is, to
determine what may lawfully be done, not what prudence may dictate
according to circumstances. Let us therefore examine, in what consists
that impartiality which a neutral nation ought to observe.
It solely relates to war, and includes two articles,—1. To give no as-
sistance when there is no obligation to give it,—nor voluntarily to fur-
* Grotius, ubi supra, not. 3.
§103. Neutral
nations.
§104. Conduct
to be observed
by a neutral
nation.


524
book iii: of war
nish troops, arms, ammunition, or any thing of direct use in war. I do
not say “to give assistance equally,” but “to give no assistance”: for it
would be absurd that a state should at one and the same time assist two
nations at war with each other; and besides it would be impossible to do
it with equality. The same things, the like number of troops, the like
quantity of arms, of stores, &c. furnished in different circumstances,
are no longer equivalent succours. 2. In whatever does not relate to war,
a neutral and impartial nation must not refuse to one of the parties, on
account of his present quarrel, what she grants to the other. This does
not deprive her of the liberty to make the advantage of the state still
serve as her ruleof conductinhernegotiations,herfriendlyconnections,
and her commerce. When this reason induces her to give preferences in
things which are ever at the free disposal of the possessor, she onlymakes
use of her right, and is not chargeable with partiality. But to refuse any
of those things to one of the parties purely <333> because he is at war
with the other, and because she wishes to favour the latter, would be
departing from the line of strict neutrality.
I have said that a neutral state ought to give no assistance to either of
the parties, when “under no obligation to give it.” This restriction is
necessary. Wehavealready seenthatwhenasovereignfurnishesthemod-
erate succour due in virtue of a former defensive alliance, he does not
become an associate in the war (§101). He may therefore fulﬁl his en-
gagement, and yet observe a strict neutrality. Of this Europe affords fre-
quent instances.
When a war breaks out between two nations, all other states that are
not bound by treaties, are free to remain neuter; and if either of the
belligerent powers attempted to force them to a junction with him, he
would do them an injury, inasmuch as he would be guilty of an in-
fringement on their independency in a very essential point. To them-
selves alone it belongs to determine whether any reason exists to induce
them to join in the contest: and there are two points which claim their
consideration,—1. The justice of the cause. If that be evident, injustice
is not to be countenanced: on the contrary, it is generous and praise-
worthy to succour oppressed innocence, when we possess the ability. If
the case be dubious, the other nations may suspend their judgment, and
§105. An ally
may furnish
the succour
due from him,
and remain
neuter.
§106. Right
of remaining
neuter.


chapter vii
525
not engage in a foreign quarrel. 2. When convinced which party has
justice on his side, they have still to consider whether it be for the ad-
vantage of the state to concern themselves in this affair, and to embark
in the war.
A nation making war, or preparing to make it, often proposes a treaty
of neutrality to a state of which she entertains suspicions. It is prudent
to learn betimes what she has to expect, and not run the risk of a neigh-
bour’s suddenly joining with the enemy in the heat of the war. In every
case where neutrality is allowable, it is also lawful to bind ourselves to it
by treaty.
Sometimes even necessity renders this justiﬁable. Thus, although it
be the duty of all nations to assist oppressed innocence (Book II. §4),
yet, if an unjust conqueror, ready to invade his neighbour’s possessions,
makes me an offer of neutrality when he is able to crush me, what can
I do better than to accept it? I yield to necessity; and my inability dis-
charges me from a natural obligation. The same inability would even
excuse me from a perfect obligation contracted by an alliance. The en-
emy of my ally threatens me with a vast superiority of force: my fate is
in his hand: he requires me to renounce the liberty of furnishing any
assistance against him. Necessity, and the care of my own safety, absolve
me from my engagements. Thus it was that Louis the Fourteenth com-
pelled Victor Amadeus duke of Savoy to quit the party of the allies.19
But then the necessity must be very urgent. It is only the cowardly or
the perﬁdious who avail themselves of the slightest grounds of alarm,
to violate <334> their promises and desert their duty. In the late war, the
king of Poland, elector of Saxony, and the king of Sardinia,20 ﬁrmly
held out against the unfortunate course of events, and, to their great
honour, could not be brought to treat without the concurrence of their
allies.
19. Victor Amadeus II, Duke of Savoy (r. 1675–1720), was forced to leave the
Anglo-DutchallianceagainstFranceduringtheWarof theSpanishSuccession(1701–
13) after the siege of Turin in 1706.
20. During the War of the Austrian Succession (1741–48), Augustus III of Poland
(r. 1734–63), who was also elector of Saxony as Frederick Augustus II, and Charles
Emmanuel III of Savoy (r. 1730–73), opposed Empress Maria Theresa of Austria.
§107. Treaties
of neutrality.


526
book iii: of war
Another reason renders these treaties of neutrality useful, and even
necessary. A nation that wishes to secure her own peace, when theﬂames
of war are kindling in her neighbourhood, cannot more successfully at-
tain that object than by concluding treaties with both parties, expressly
agreeing what each may do or require in virtue of the neutrality. This is
a sure mode to preserve herself in peace, and to obviate all disputes and
cavils.
Without such treaties, it is to be feared that disputes will often arise
respecting what neutrality does or does not allow. This subject presents
many questions which authors have discussed withgreatheat,andwhich
have given rise to the most dangerous quarrels between nations. Yet the
law of nature and of nations has its invariable principles, and affords
rules on this head, as well as on the others. Some things also have grown
intocustomamongcivilisednations,andaretobeconformedtobythose
who would not incur the reproach of unjustly breaking the peace.* As
to the rules of the natural law of nations, they result from a just com-
bination of the laws of war, with the liberty, the safety, the advantages,
the commerce, and the other rights of neutral nations. It is on this prin-
ciple that we shall lay down the following rules.
First, No act on the part of a nation, which falls within the exercise
of her rights, and is done solely with a view to her own good, without
partiality, without a design of favouring one power to the prejudice of
another,—no act of that kind, I say, can in general be considered as
contrary to neutrality; nor does it become such, except on particular
occasions when it cannot take place without injury to one of the parties,
who has then a particular right to oppose it. Thus, the besieger has a
right to prohibit access to the place besieged (see §117 in the sequel).
Except in cases of this nature, shall the quarrels of others deprive me of
the free exercise of my rights in the pursuit of measures which I judge
advantageoustomy people?Therefore,whenitisthecustomof anation,
* The following is an instance.—It was determined by the Dutch, that, on a
vessel’s entering a neutral port after having taken any of the enemies of her nation
prisoners on the high seas, she should be obliged to set those prisoners at liberty,
because they were then fallen into the power of a nation that was in neutrality with
the belligerent parties.—The same rule had been observed by England in the war
between Spain and the United Provinces. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§108. Addi-
tional reason
for making
these treaties.
§109. Foun-
dation of the
rules of
neutrality.
§110. How
levies may
be allowed,
money lent,
and every kind
of things sold,
without a
breach of
neutrality.


chapter vii
527
for the purpose of employing and training her subjects, to permit levies
of troops in favour of a particular power to whom she thinks proper to
intrust them,—the enemy of that power cannot look upon such per-
missions as acts of hostility, unless they are given with a view to the
invasion of his territories, or the support of an odious and evidently
<335> unjust cause. He cannot even demand, as matter of right, thatthe
like favour be granted to him,—because that nation may have reasons
for refusing him, which do not hold good with regard to his adversary;
and it belongs to that nation alone to judge of what best suits her cir-
cumstances. The Switzers, as we have already observed, grant levies of
troops to whom they please; and no power has hitherto thought ﬁt to
quarrel with them on that head. It must, however, be owned, that, if
those levies were considerable, and constituted the principal strength of
my enemy, while, without any substantial reason being alleged, I were
absolutely refused all levies whatever,— I should have just cause to con-
sider that nation as leagued with my enemy; and, in this case, the care
of my own safety would authorise me to treat her as such.
The case is the same with respect to money which a nation may have
been accustomed to lend out at interest. If the sovereign or his subjects
lend money to my enemy on that footing, and refuse it to me because
they have not the same conﬁdence in me, this is no breach of neutrality.
They lodge their property where they think it safest. If such preference
be not founded on good reasons, I may impute it to ill-will against me,
or to a predilection for my enemy. Yet if I should make it a pretence for
declaring war, both the true principles of the law of nations, and the
general custom happily established in Europe, would join in condemn-
ing me. While it appears that this nation lends out her money purely for
the sake of gaining an interest upon it, she is at liberty to dispose of it
according to her own discretion; and I have no right to complain.
But if the loan were evidently granted for the purpose of enabling an
enemy to attack me, this would be concurring in the war against me.
If the troops, above alluded to, were furnished to my enemy by the
state herself, and at her own expense, or the money in like manner lent
by the state, without interest, it would no longer be a doubtful question
whether such assistance were incompatible with neutrality.
Further, it may be afﬁrmed on the same principles, that if a nation

528
book iii: of war
trades in arms, timber for ship-building, vessels, and warlike stores,—I
cannot take it amiss that she sells such things to my enemy, provided she
does not refuse to sell them to me also at a reasonable price. She carries
on her trade without any design to injure me; and by continuing it in
the same manner as if I were not engaged in war, she gives me no just
cause of complaint.
In what I have said above, it is supposed that my enemy goes himself
to a neutral country to make his purchases. Let us now discuss another
case,—that of neutral nations resorting to my enemy’s country forcom-
mercial purposes. It is certain, that, as they have no part in my quarrel,
they are under no obligation to renounce their commerce for the sake
of avoiding to supply my <336> enemy with the means of carrying on
the war against me. Should they affect to refuse sellingmeasinglearticle,
while at the same time they take pains to convey an abundant supply to
my enemy, with an evident intention to favour him,—such partial con-
duct would exclude them from the neutrality they enjoyed. But if they
only continue their customary trade, they do not thereby declare them-
selves against my interest; they only exercise a right which they are under
no obligation of sacriﬁcing to me.
On the other hand, whenever I am at war with a nation, both my
safety and welfare prompt me to deprive her, as far as possible, of every
thing which may enable her to resist or injure me. In this instance, the
law of necessity exerts its full force. If that law warrants me, onoccasion,
to seize what belongs to other people, will it not likewise warrant me to
intercept every thing belonging to war, which neutral nations are car-
rying to my enemy? Even if I should, by taking such measure, render
all those neutral nations my enemies, I had better run that hazard than
suffer him who is actually at war with me, thus freely to receive supplies,
and collect additional strength to oppose me. It is therefore very proper,
and perfectly conformable to the law of nations (which disapproves of
multiplying the causes of war), not to consider those seizures of the
goods of neutral nations as acts of hostility.
When I have notiﬁed to them my declaration of war against such or
such a nation, if they will afterwards expose themselves to risk in sup-
plying her with things which serve to carry on war, they will have no
§111. Trade
of neutral
nations with
those which
are at war.


chapter vii
529
reason to complain if their goods fall into my possession; and I, on the
other hand, do not declare war against them for having attempted to
convey such goods. They suffer indeed by a war in which they have no
concern; but they suffer accidentally. I do not oppose their right: I only
exert my own; and if our rights clash with and reciprocally injure each
other, that circumstance is the effect of inevitable necessity. Such colli-
sions daily happen in war. When, in pursuance of my rights, I exhaust
a country from which you derived your subsistence,—when I besiege a
city with which you carried on a proﬁtable trade,—I doubtless injure
you; I subject you to losses and inconveniences; but it is without any
design of hurting you. I only make use of my rights, and consequently
do you no injustice.
But that limits may be set to these inconveniences, and that the com-
merce of neutral nations may subsist in as great a degree of freedom as
is consistent with the laws of war, there are certain rules to be observed,
on which Europe seems to be generally agreed.
The ﬁrst is, carefully to distinguish ordinary goods which have no
relation to war, from those that are peculiarly subservient to it. Neutral
nations should enjoy perfect liberty to trade in the former: the bellig-
erent powers cannot with any reason refuse <337> it, or prevent the
importation of such goods into the enemy’s country: the care of their
own safety, the necessity of self-defence, does not authorise them to do
it, since those things will not render the enemy more formidable. An
attempt to interrupt or put a stop to this trade would be a violation of
the rights of neutral nations, a ﬂagrant injury to them;—necessity, as
we have above observed, being the only reason which can authoriseany
restraint on their trade and navigation to the ports of the enemy. En-
gland and the United Provinces having agreed, in the treaty of White-
hall, signed on the 22d of August, 1689, to notify to all states not at
war with France, that they would attack every ship bound to or coming
from any port of that kingdom, and that they before-hand declared
every such ship to be a lawful prize,—Sweden and Denmark, from
whom some ships had been taken, entered into a counter-treaty on the
17th of March, 1693, for the purpose of maintaining their rights and
procuring just satisfaction. And the two maritime powers, being con-
§112. Contra-
band goods.


530
book iii: of war
vinced that the complaints of the two crowns were well founded, did
them justice.*
Commodities particularly useful in war, and the importation of
which to an enemy is prohibited, are called contraband goods. Such are
arms, ammunition, timber for ship-building, every kind of naval stores,
horses,—and even provisions, in certain junctures, when we have hopes
of reducing the enemy by famine.†
But in order to hinder the transportation of contraband goods to an
enemy, are we only to stop and seize them, paying the value to the
owner,—or have we a right to conﬁscate them? Barely to stop those
goods would in general prove an ineffectual mode, especially at sea,
where there is no possibility of entirely cutting off all access to the en-
emy’s harbours. Recourse is therefore had to the expedient of conﬁs-
cating all contraband <338> goods that we can seize on, in order that the
fear of loss may operate as a check on the avidity of gain, and deter the
merchants of neutral countries from supplying the enemy with such
commodities. And indeed it is an object of such high importance to a
* See other instances in Grotius, de Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. iii. cap. i. §5, not. 6.
† The Pensionary De Witt, in a letter of January 14, 1654, acknowledges that it
would be contrary to the law of nations to prevent neutrals from carrying corn to an
enemy’s country: but he says that we may lawfully prevent them from supplying the
enemy with cordage and other materials for the rigging and equipment of ships of
war.
In 1597, queen Elizabeth would not allow the Poles and Danes to furnish Spain
with provisions, much less with arms,—alleging that “according to the rules of war,
it is lawful to reduce an enemy even by famine, with the view of obliging him to sue
for peace.” The United Provinces, ﬁnding it necessary to observe a greater degree of
circumspection, did not prevent neutral nations from carrying on every kind of com-
merce with Spain. It is true, indeed, that, while their own subjects sold both arms
and provisions to the Spaniards, they could not with propriety have attempted to
forbid neutral nations to carry on a similar trade. (Grotius, Hist. of the Disturbances
in the Low Countries, book vi.) Nevertheless, in 1646, the United Provinces pub-
lished an edict prohibiting their own subjects in general, and even neutral nations,
to carry either provisions or any other merchandise to Spain, because the Spaniards,
“after having, under the appearance of commerce, allured foreign vessels to their
ports, detained them, and made use of them as ships of war.” And for this reason the
same edict declared that “the confederates, when blocking up their enemies’ ports,
would seize upon every vessel they saw steering towards those places.” Ibid. book xv.
p. 572. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§113. Whether
such goods
may be con-
ﬁscated.


chapter vii
531
nation at war to prevent, as far as possible, the enemy’s being supplied
with such articles as will add to his strength and render him more dan-
gerous, that necessity and the care of her own welfare and safety autho-
rise her to take effectual methods for that purpose, and to declare that
all commodities of that nature, destined for the enemy, shall be consid-
ered as lawful prize. On this account she notiﬁes to the neutral states her
declaration of war (§63); whereupon, the latter usually give orders to
their subjects to refrain from all contraband commerce with the nations
at war, declaring that if they are captured in carrying on such trade, the
sovereign will not protect them. This rule is the point where the general
custom of Europe seems at present ﬁxed, after a number of variations,
as will appear from the note of Grotius which we have just quoted, and
particularly from the ordinances of the kings of France, in the years 1543
and 1584, which only allow the French to seize contraband goods, and
to keep them on paying the value. The modern usage is certainly the
most agreeable to the mutual duties of nations, and the best calculated
to reconcile their respective rights. The nation at war is highly interested
in depriving the enemy of all foreign assistance; and this circumstance
gives her a right to consider all those, if not absolutely as enemies, at
least as people that feel very little scruple to injure her, who carry to her
enemy the articles of which he stands in need for the support of thewar:
she therefore punishes them by the conﬁscation of their goods. Should
their sovereign undertake to protect them, such conduct would be tan-
tamount to his furnishing the enemy with those succours himself:—a
measure which were undoubtedly inconsistent with neutrality. When a
nation, without any other motive than the prospect of gain, isemployed
in strengthening my enemy, and regardless of the irreparable evil which
she may thereby entail upon me,* she is certainly not my friend, and
gives me a right to consider and treat her as an associate of my enemy.
In order, therefore, toavoidperpetualsubjectsof complaintandrupture,
* In our time the king of Spain [[Philip V, r. 1700–1746]] prohibited allHamburg
ships from entering his harbours, because that city had engaged to furnish the Al-
gerines with military stores; and thus he obliged the Hamburgers tocanceltheirtreaty
with the Barbarians.


532
book iii: of war
it has, in perfect conformity to sound principles, been agreed that the
belligerent powers may seize and conﬁscate all contraband goods which
neutral persons shall attempt to carry to their enemy, without any com-
plaint from the sovereign of those merchants; as, on the other hand, the
power at war does not impute to the neutral sovereigns these practices
of their subjects. Care is even taken to settle every particular of thiskind
in treaties of commerce and navigation. <339>
We cannot prevent the conveyance of contraband goods, without
searching neutral vessels that we meet at sea: we have therefore a right
to search them. Some powerful nations have indeed, at different times,
refused to submit to this search. “After the peace of Vervins,21 queen
Elizabeth, continuing the war against Spain,requestedpermissionof the
king of France to cause all French ships bound for Spain to be searched,
in order to discover whether they secretly carried any military stores to
that country: but this was refused, as an injury to trade, and a favourable
occasion for pillage.”* At present a neutral ship refusing to be searched,
would from that proceeding alone be condemned as a lawful prize. But
to avoid inconveniences, oppression, and every other abuse, the manner
of the search is settled in the treaties of navigation and commerce. It is
the established custom at present to give full credit to the certiﬁcates,
bills of lading, &c. produced by the master of the ship, unless any fraud
appear in them, or there be good reasons for suspecting it.
If we ﬁnd an enemy’s effects on board a neutral ship, we seize them
by the rights of war: but we are naturally bound to pay the freight to
the master of the vessel, who is not to suffer by such seizure.†
* Grotius, ubi supra.
† “I have obtained” (said the ambassador Boreel, in a letter to the Grand Pen-
sionary De Witt) “the abrogation of that pretended French law, that enemies’property
involves in conﬁscation the property of friends; so that, if henceforward any effects be-
longing to the enemies of France be found in a free Dutch vessel, those effects alone
shall be liable to conﬁscation; and the vessel shall be released, together with all the
other property on board. But I ﬁnd it impossible to obtain the object of the twenty-
fourth article of my instructions, which says that the immunity of the vesselshallextend
to the cargo, even if enemies’ property.” De Witt’s Letters and Negotiations, vol. i.
p. 80.—Such a law as the latter would be more natural than the former. [[Noteadded
in 1773/1797 editions.]]
21. In 1590.
§114.
Searching
neutral ships.
§115. Enemy’s
property on
board a neu-
tral ship.


chapter vii
533
The effects of neutrals, found in an enemy’s ship, are to be restored
to the owners, against whom there is no right of conﬁscation,—but
without any allowance for detainder, decay, &c. The loss sustained by
the neutrals on this occasion is an accident to which they exposed them-
selves by embarking their property in an enemy’s ship; and the captor,
in exercising the rights of war, is not responsible for the accidents which
may thence result, any more than if his cannon kills a neutral passenger
who happens unfortunately to be on board an enemy’s vessel.
Hitherto we have considered the commerce of neutral nations with
the territories of the enemy in general. There is a particularcaseinwhich
the rights of war extend still farther. All commerce with a besieged town
is absolutely prohibited. If I lay siege to a place, or even simply blockade
it, I have a right tohinderany onefromentering,andtotreatasanenemy
whoever attempts to enter the place, or carry any thing to the besieged,
without my leave; for he opposes my undertaking, and may contribute
to the miscarriage of it, and thus involve me in all<340>themisfortunes
of an unsuccessful war. King Demetrius22 hanged up the master and
pilot of a vessel carrying provisions to Athens at a time when he was on
the point of reducing that city by famine.* In the long and bloody war
carried on by the United ProvincesagainstSpainfortherecoveryof their
liberties, they would not suffer the English to carry goods to Dunkirk,
before which the Dutch ﬂeet lay.†
A neutral nation preserves, towards both the belligerent powers, the
several relations which nature has instituted between nations. She ought
to shew herself ready to render them every ofﬁce of humanity recipro-
cally due from one nation to another: she ought, in every thing not di-
rectly relating to war, to give them all the assistance in her power, and
of which they may stand in need. Such assistance, however, must be
given with impartiality; that is to say, she must not refuse any thing to
one of the parties on account of his being at war with the other (§104).
But this is no reason why a neutral state, under particular connections
* Plutarch, in Demetrio.
† Grotius, ubi supra.
22. King Demetrius of Macedonia, r. 294–288 b.c.
§116. Neutral
property on
board an
enemy’s ship.
§117. Trade
with a be-
sieged town.
§118. Impar-
tial ofﬁces of
neutrals.

534
book iii: of war
of friendship and good-neighbourhood withoneof thebelligerentpow-
ers, may not, in every thing that is unconnected with war, grant him all
those preferences which are due to friends: much less does she affordany
grounds of exception to her conduct, if, in commerce, for instance, she
continues to allow him such indulgences as have been stipulated in her
treaties with him. She ought therefore, as far as the public welfare will
permit, equally to allow the subjects of both partiesto visitherterritories
on business, and there to purchase provisions, horses, and, in general,
every thing they stand in need of,—unless she has, by a treaty of neu-
trality, promised to refuse to both parties such articles as are used in war.
Amidst all the wars which disturb Europe, the Switzers preserve their
territories in a state of neutrality. Every nation indiscriminately is al-
lowed free access, for the purchase of provisions if the country has a
surplus, and for that of horses, ammunition, and arms.
An innocent passage is due to all nations with whom a state is at peace
(Book II. §123); and this duty extends to troops as well as to individuals.
But it rests with the sovereign of the country to judge whether the pas-
sage be innocent; and it is very difﬁcult for that of an army to be entirely
so. In the late wars of Italy,23 the territories of the republic of Venice,
and those of the pope, sustained very great damages by the passage of
armies, and often became the theatre of the war.
Since, therefore, the passage of troops, and especially that of a whole
army, is by no means a matter of indifference, he who desires to march
his troops through a neutral country, must apply for the sovereign’s per-
mission. To enter his territory without his consent, is a violation of his
rights of sovereignty and supreme dominion, by virtue of which, that
country is not to be disposed of for any use whatever, withouthisexpress
or tacit permission. <341> Now a tacit permission for the entrance of a
body of troops is not to be presumed, since their entrance may be pro-
ductive of the most serious consequences.
23. Between 1745 and 1747 Italy became a major battleground in the War of the
Austrian Succession, with an alliance of Genoa, Naples, France, and Spain ﬁghting
against the Austrian forces.
§119. Passage
of troops
through a neu-
tral country.
§120. Passage
to be asked.


chapter vii
535
If the neutral sovereign has good reasons for refusing a passage, he
is not obliged to grant it,—the passage in that case being no longer
innocent.
In all doubtful cases, we must submit to the judgment of the pro-
prietor respecting the innocence of the use we desire to make of things
belonging to another (Book II. §§128, 130), and must acquiesce in his
refusal, even though we think it unjust. If the refusal be evidently un-
just,—if the use, and, in the case now before us, the passage, be un-
questionably innocent,—a nation may do herself justice, and take by
force what is unjustly denied to her. But we have already observed that
it is very difﬁcult for the passage of an army to be absolutely innocent,
and much more so for the innocence to be very evident. So various are
the evils it may occasion, and the dangers that may attend it,—so com-
plicated are they in their nature, and so numerous are the circumstances
with which they are connected,—that to foresee and provide for every
thing, is next to impossible. Besides, self-interest has so powerful an in-
ﬂuence on the judgments of men, that if he who requires the passage is
to be the judge of its innocence, he will admit none of the reasons
brought against it; and thus a door is opened to continual quarrels and
hostilities. The tranquillity, therefore, and the common safety of na-
tions, require that each should be mistress of her own territory, and at
liberty to refuse every foreign army an entrance, when she has not de-
parted from her natural liberties in that respect, by treaties. From this
rule, however, let us except those very uncommon cases which admit of
the most evident demonstration that the passage required is wholly un-
attended with inconvenienceordanger.If,onsuchanoccasion,apassage
be forced, he who forces it will not be so much blamed as the nation that
has indiscreetly subjected herself to this violence. Another case, which
carries its own exception on the very face of it, and admits not of the
smallest doubt, is that of extreme necessity. Urgent and absolute neces-
sity suspends all the rights of property (Book II. §§119, 123): and if the
proprietor be not under the same pressure of necessity as you, it is al-
lowable for you, even against his will, to make use of what belongs to
him. When, therefore, an army ﬁnd themselves exposed to imminent
destruction or unable to return to their own country unless they pass
§121. It may
be refused for
good reasons.
§122. In what
case it may
be forced.


536
book iii: of war
through neutral territories, they have a right to pass in spite of the sov-
ereign, and to force their way, sword in hand. But they ought ﬁrst to
request a passage, to offer securities, and pay for whatever damages they
may occasion. Such was the mode pursued by the Greeks on theirreturn
from Asia, under the conduct of Agesilau¨s.* <342>
Extreme necessity may even authorise the temporary seizure of aneu-
tral town, and the putting a garrison therein, with a view to cover our-
selves from the enemy, or to prevent the execution of his designs against
that town, when the sovereign is not able to defend it. But when the
danger is over, we must immediately restore the place, and pay all the
charges, inconveniences, and damages, which we have occasioned by
seizing it.
When the passage is not of absolute necessity, the bare danger which
attends the admission of a powerful army into our territory, may au-
thorise us to refuse them permission to enter. We may have reason to
apprehend that they will be tempted to take possession of the country,
or at least to act as masters while they are in it, and to live at discretion.
Let it not be said with Grotius,† that he who requires the passage is not
to be deprived of his right on account of our unjust fears. A probable
fear, founded on good reasons, gives us a right to avoid whatever may
realise it; and the conduct of nations affords but too just grounds for the
fear in question. Besides, the right of passage is not a perfectright,unless
in a case of urgent necessity, or when we have the most perfect evidence
that the passage is innocent.
But, in the preceding section, I suppose it impracticable to obtain
sufﬁcient security which shall leave us no cause to apprehend any hostile
attempts or violent proceedings on the part of those who ask permission
to pass. If any such security can be obtained (and the safest one is, to
allow them to pass only in small bodies, and upon delivering up their
arms, as has been sometimes required),‡ the reason arising from fear no
* Plutarch’s life of Agesilau¨s.
† Book ii. chap. ii. §13. note 5 [[Law of War and Peace]].
‡ By the Eleans, and the ancient inhabitants of Cologne. See Grotius, ibid.
§123. The fear
of danger
authorises
a refusal,
§124. or a
demand of
every reason-
able security.


chapter vi
Of the several Orders of public Ministers,—of
the Representative Character,—and of the Honours
due to Ministers.
Sect. 69. Origin of the several orders of public
ministers,
page 459
70. Representative character,
459
71. Embassadors,
459
72. Envoys,
460
73. Residents,
460
74. Ministers,
460
75. Consuls, agents, deputies, commissioners, &c.
461
76. Credentials,
461
77. Instructions,
461
78. Right of sending embassadors,
461
79. Honours due to embassadors,
462
chapter vii
Of the Rights, Privileges, and Immunities of
Embassadors, and other public Ministers.
80. Respect due to public ministers,
464
81. Their persons sacred and inviolable,
464
82. Particular protection due to them,
465
83. When it commences,
466
84. What is due to them in the countries through
which they pass,
466
85. Embassadors going to an enemy’s country,
467
86. Embassies between enemies,
467
87. Heralds, trumpeters, and drummers,
468
88. Ministers, trumpeters, &c. to be respected even in
a civil war,
468
89. Sometimes they may be refused admittance,
469
90. Every thing which has the appearance of insult to
them, must be avoided,
469
91. By and to whom they may be sent,
470
92. Independence of foreign ministers,
470
93. How the foreign minister is to behave,
472
94. How he may be punished for ordinary
transgressions,
475
95. for faults committed against the prince,
475


64
original contents
Sect. 96. Right of ordering away an embassador who
is guilty, or justly suspected, <liv>
page 475
97. Right of repressing him by force, if he behaves
as an enemy,
476
98. Embassador forming dangerous plots
and conspiracies,
476
99. What may be done to him according to the
exigency of the case,
478
100. Embassador attempting against the sovereign’s life,
479
101. Two remarkable instances respecting the
immunities of public ministers,
480
102. Whether reprisals may be made on an embassador,
481
103. Agreement of nations concerning the privileges
of embassadors,
482
104. Free exercise of religion,
483
105. Whether an embassador be exempted from
all imposts,
484
106. Obligation founded on use and custom,
485
107. A minister whose character is not public,
485
108. A sovereign in a foreign country,
486
109. Deputies to the states,
487
chapter viii
Of the Judge of Embassadors in Civil Cases.
110. The embassador is exempt from the civil
jurisdiction of the country where he resides,
488
111. How he may voluntarily subject himself to it,
489
112. A minister who is a subject of the state where he
is employed,
490
113. Immunity of the minister extends to his property,
491
114. The exemption cannot extend to effects belonging
to any trade the minister may carry on,
492
115. nor to immovable property which he possesses in
the country,
493
116. How justice may be obtained against an
embassador,
493
chapter ix
Of the Embassador’s House and Domestics.
117. The embassador’s house,
494
118. Right of asylum,
495


original contents
65
Sect. 119. Exemption of an embassador’s carriages,
page 496
120. of his retinue,
497
121. of his wife and family,
497
122. of the secretary of the embassy,
497
123. of the embassador’s couriers and dispatches,
498
124. The embassador’s authority over his retinue,
498
125. When the rights of an embassador expire,
500
126. Cases when new credentials are necessary,
500
127. Conclusion, <lv>
500



67
the
LAW
of
NATIONS
u
p re l i m i n a r i e s
u
Idea and general Principles of the
Law of Nations.
Nations or states are bodies politic, societies of men united together for
the purpose of promoting their mutual safety and advantageby thejoint
efforts of their combined strength.
Such a society has her affairs and her interests; she deliberates and
takes resolutions in common; thus becoming a moral person, who pos-
sesses an understanding and a will peculiar to herself, and is susceptible
of obligations and rights.
To establish on a solid foundation the obligations and rights of na-
tions, is the design of this work. The law of nations is the science which
teaches the rights subsisting between nations or states, and the obligations
correspondent to those rights.
In this treatise it will appear, in what manner states, as such, ought to
regulate all their actions. We shall examine the obligations of a people,
as well towards themselves as towards other nations; and by that means
we shall discover the rights which result from those obligations. For, the
§1. What is
meant by a
nation or state.
§2. It is a
moral person.
§3. Deﬁnition
of the law of
nations.


68
preliminaries
right being nothing more than the power of doing what is morally pos-
sible, that is to say, what is proper and consistentwithduty,—itisevident
that right is derived from duty, or passive obligation,—the obligation
we lie under to act in such or such manner. It is therefore<lvi>necessary
that a nation should acquire a knowledge of the obligations incumbent
on her, in order that she may not only avoid all violation of her duty,
butalsobeable distinctly toascertainherrights,orwhatshemaylawfully
require from other nations.
Nations being composed of men naturally free and independent,and
who, before the establishment of civil societies,livedtogetherinthestate
of nature,—nations or sovereign states are to be considered as so many
free persons living together in the state of nature.
It is a settled point with writers on the natural law, that all meninherit
from nature a perfect liberty and independence, of which they cannot
be deprived without their own consent. In a state, the individualcitizens
do not enjoy them fully and absolutely, because they have made a partial
surrender of them to the sovereign. But the body of the nation,thestate,
remains absolutely free and independent with respect to all other men,
all other nations, as long as it has not voluntarily submitted to them.
As men are subject to the laws of nature,—and as their union in civil
society cannot have exempted them from the obligation toobservethose
laws,sincebythatuniontheydonotceasetobemen,—theentirenation,
whose common will is but the result of the united wills of the citizens,
remains subject to the laws of nature, and is bound to respect them in
all her proceedings. And since right arises from obligation, as we have
just observed (§3), the nation possesses also the same rights which nature
has conferred upon men in order to enable them to perform theirduties.
We must therefore apply to nations the rules of the law of nature, in
order to discover what their obligations are, and what their rights: con-
sequently the law of nations is originally no other than the law of nature
applied to nations. But as the application of a rule cannot be just and
reasonable unless it be made in a manner suitable to the subject, we are
not to imagine that the law of nations is precisely and in every case the
same as the law of nature, with the difference only of the subjects to
which it is applied, so as to allow of our substituting nations for indi-
§4. In what
light nations
or states are to
be considered.
§5. To what
laws nations
are subject.
§6. In what
the law of
nations origi-
nally consists.


preliminaries
69
viduals. A state or civil society is a subject very different from an indi-
vidual of the human race: from which circumstance, pursuanttothelaw
of nature itself, there result, in many cases, very differentobligationsand
rights; <lvii> since the same general rule, applied to twosubjects,cannot
produce exactly the same decisions, when the subjects are different; and
a particular rule which is perfectly just with respect to one subject, is not
applicable to another subject of a quite different nature. There aremany
cases, therefore, in which the law of nature does notdecidebetweenstate
and state in the same manner as it would between man and man. We
must therefore know how to accommodate the application of it to dif-
ferent subjects; and it is the art of thus applying it with a precision
founded on right reason, that renders the law of nations a distinct sci-
ence.* <lviii>
* The study of this science presupposes an acquaintance with the ordinary law of
nature, of which human individuals are the objects. Nevertheless, for the sake of
those who have not systematically studied that law, it will not be amiss to give in this
place a general idea of it. The natural law is the science of the laws of nature, of those
laws which nature imposes on mankind, or to which they are subject by the very
circumstance of their being men; a science, whose ﬁrst principle is this axiom of
incontestable truth—“The great end of every being endowed with intellect and sen-
timent, is happiness.” It is by the desire alone of that happiness that we can bind a
creature possessed of the faculty of thought, and form the ties of that obligation
which shall make him submit to any rule. Now, by studying the nature of things,
and that of man in particular, we may thence deducetheruleswhichmanmustfollow
in order to attain his great end,—to obtain the most perfect happiness of which he
is susceptible. We call those rules the natural laws, or the laws of nature. They are
certain, they are sacred, and obligatory on every man possessed of reason, indepen-
dently of every other consideration than that of his nature, and even though we
should suppose him totally ignorant of the existence of a God. But the sublime con-
sideration of an eternal, necessary, inﬁnite Being, the author of the universe, adds
the most lively energy to the law of nature, and carries it to the highest degree of
perfection. That necessary Being necessarily unites in himself all perfection: he is
therefore superlatively good, and displays his goodness by forming creatures suscep-
tible of happiness. It is then his wish that his creatures should be as happy as is con-
sistent with their nature: consequently it is his will that they should, in their whole
conduct, follow the rules which that same nature lays down for them, as the most
certain road to happiness. Thus the will of the creator perfectly coincides with the
simple indications of nature: and those two sources producing the same law, unite
in forming the same obligation. The whole reverts to the ﬁrst greatendof man,which
is happiness. It was to conduct him to that great end that the laws of nature were


70
preliminaries
We call that the necessary law of nations which consists in the appli-
cation of the law of nature to nations. It is necessary, because nations are
absolutely bound to observe it. This law contains thepreceptsprescribed
by the law of nature to states, on whom that law is not less obligatory
than on individuals, since states are composed of men, their resolutions
are taken by men, and the law of nature is binding on all men, under
whatever relation they act. This is the law which Grotius, and those who
follow him, call the internal law of nations, on accountof itsbeingoblig-
atory on nations in point of conscience. Several writers term it the nat-
ural law of nations.
Since therefore the necessary lawof nationsconsistsintheapplication
of the law of nature to states,—which law is immutable, as being
founded on the nature of things, and particularly on the nature of
man,—it follows, that the necessary law of nations is immutable.
Whence, as this law is immutable, and the obligations that arise from
it necessary and indispensable, nations can neither make any changes in
it by their conventions, dispense with it in their own conduct, nor re-
ciprocally release each other from the observance of it.
This is the principle by which we may distinguish lawful conventions
or treaties from those that are not lawful, and innocent and rational cus-
toms from those that are unjust or censurable.
ordained: it is from the desire of happiness that his obligation to observe those laws
arises. There is, therefore, no man,—whatever may be his ideas respecting the origin
of the universe,—even if he had the misfortune to be an atheist,—who is not bound
to obey the laws of nature. They are necessary to the general happiness of mankind;
and whoever should reject them, whoever should openly despise them,wouldbysuch
conduct alone declare himself an enemy to the human race, and deserve to be treated
as such. Now, one of the ﬁrst truths which the study of man reveals to us, and which
is a necessary consequence of his nature, is, that, in a state of lonely separation from
the rest of his species, he cannot attain his great end—happiness: and the reason is,
that he was intended to live in society with his fellow-creatures. Nature herself,there-
fore, has established that society, whose great end is the common advantage of all its
members:andthemeansof attainingthatendconstitutetherulesthateachindividual
is bound to observe in his whole conduct. Such are the natural laws of humansociety.
Having thus given ageneralidea of them,whichissufﬁcientforanyintelligentreader,
and is developed at large in several valuable works, letus returntotheparticularobject
of this treatise. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§7. Deﬁnition
of the neces-
sary law of
nations.
§8. It is
immutable.
§9. Nations
can make no
change in it,
nor dispense
with the obli-
gations arising
from it.


preliminaries
71
There are things, just in themselves, and allowed by the necessary law
of nations, on which states may mutually agree with each other, and
which they may consecrate and enforce by their manners and customs.
There are <lix> others, of an indifferent nature,respectingwhich,itrests
at the option of nations to make in their treaties whatever agreements
they please, or to introduce whatever custom or practice they think
proper. But every treaty, every custom, which contravenes the injunc-
tions or prohibitions of the necessary law of nations, is unlawful. It will
appear, however, in the sequel, that it is only by the internal law, by the
law of conscience, such conventions or treaties are always condemned
as unlawful,—and that, for reasons which shall be given in their proper
place, they are nevertheless often valid by the external law.Nationsbeing
free and independent,—though the conduct of one of them be illegal
and condemnable by the laws of conscience, the others are bound to
acquiesce in it, when it does not infringe upon their perfect rights. The
liberty of that nation would not remain entire, if the others were to
arrogate to themselves the right of inspecting and regulating her ac-
tions;—an assumption on their part, that would be contrary to the law
of nature, which declares every nation free and independent of all the
others.
Man is so formed by nature, that he cannot supply all his own wants,
but necessarily stands in need of the intercourse and assistance of his
fellow-creatures, whether for his immediate preservation, or for the sake
of perfectinghis nature,andenjoyingsuchalifeasissuitabletoarational
being. This is sufﬁciently proved by experience. We have instances of
persons, who, having grown up to manhood among the bears of the
forest, enjoyed not the use of speech or of reason, but were, like the
brute beasts, possessed only of sensitive faculties. We see moreover that
nature has refused tobestowonmenthesamestrengthandnaturalweap-
ons of defence with which she has furnished other animals,—having,in
lieu of those advantages, endowed mankind with the faculties of speech
and reason, or at least a capability of acquiring them by an intercourse
with their fellow-creatures. Speech enables them to communicate with
each other, to give each other mutual assistance, to perfect their reason
and knowledge; and having thus become intelligent, they ﬁnd a thou-
§10. Society
established
by nature
between all
mankind;


72
preliminaries
sand methods of preserving themselves, and supplyingtheirwants.Each
individual, moreover, is intimately conscious that he can neither live
happily nor improve his nature without the intercourse and assistance
of others. Since, therefore, na-<lx>ture has thus formed mankind, it is
a convincing proof of her intention that they should communicatewith
and mutually aid and assist each other.
Hence is deduced the establishment of natural society among men.
The general law of that society is, that each individual should do for the
others every thing which their necessities require, and which he can per-
form without neglecting the duty that he owes to himself: a law which
all men must observe in order to live in a manner consonant to their
nature, and conformable to the views of their common creator,—a law
which our own safety, our happiness, our dearest interests, ought to ren-
der sacred to every one of us. Such is the general obligation that binds
us to the observance of our duties: let us fulﬁl them with care, if we
would wisely endeavour to promote our own advantage.
It is easy to conceive what exalted felicity the world would enjoy,were
all men willing to observe the rule that we have just laid down. On the
contrary, if each man wholly and immediately directs all his thoughts
to his own interest, if he does nothing for the sake of other men, the
whole human race together will be immersed in the deepest wretched-
ness. Let us therefore endeavour to promote the general happiness of
mankind: all mankind, in return, will endeavour to promote ours; and
thus we shall establish our felicity on the most solid foundations.
The universal societyof thehumanracebeinganinstitutionof nature
herself, that is to say, a necessary consequence of the nature of man,—
all men, in whatever stations they are placed, are bound to cultivate it,
and to discharge its duties. They cannot liberate themselves from the
obligation by any convention, by any private association. When, there-
fore, they unite in civil society for the purpose of formingaseparatestate
or nation, they may indeed enter into particular engagements towards
those with whom they associate themselves; but they remain still bound
to the performance of their duties towards the rest of mankind. All the
difference consists in this, that, having agreed to act in common, and
having resigned their rights and submitted their will to the body of the
chapter vii
537
longer exists. But those who wish to pass should consent to give every
reasonable security required of them, and consequently submit to pass
by divisions and deliver up their arms, if the passage be denied them on
any other terms. The choice of the security they are to give does not rest
with them. Hostages or a bond would oftenproveveryslendersecurities.
Of what advantage will it be to me to hold hostages from one who will
render himself master over me? And as to a bond, it is of very little avail
against a prince of much superior power.
But, is it always incumbent on us to give every security a nation may
require, when we wish to pass through her territories?—In the ﬁrst place
we are to make a distinction between the different reasons that may exist
for our passing through the country; and we are next to consider the
manners of the people whose permission we ask. If the passage be not
essentially necessary, and can be obtained only on suspiciousordisagree-
ableconditions, we must relinquishallideaof it,asinthecaseof arefusal
(§122). But if necessity authorises me to pass, the conditions on which
the passage will be granted may be accepted or rejected, according to the
manners of the people I am treating with. Suppose I am to <343> cross
the country of a barbarous, savage, and perﬁdious nation,—shall I leave
myself at their discretion, by giving up my arms and causing my troops
to march in divisions? No one, I presume, will condemn me to take so
dangerous a step. Since necessity authorises me to pass, a kind of new
necessity arises for my passing in such a posture as will secure me from
any ambuscade or violence. I will offer every security that can be given
without foolishly exposing myself; and if the offer is rejected, I must be
guided by necessity and prudence,—and, let me add, by the most scru-
pulous moderation, in order to avoid exceeding the bounds of that right
which I derive from necessity.
If the neutral state grants or refuses a passage to one of the parties at
war, she ought in like manner to grant or refuse it to the other, unless a
change of circumstances affords her substantial reasons for acting oth-
erwise. Without such reasons, to grant to one party what she refuses to
the other, would be a partial distinction, and a departure from the line
of strict neutrality.
§125. Whether
always neces-
sary to give
every kind
of security
required.
§126. Equality
to be observed
towards both
parties as to
the passage.


538
book iii: of war
When I have no reason to refuse a passage, the party against whom
it is granted has no right to complain of my conduct, much less to make
it the ground of a hostile attack upon me, since I have done no more
than what the law of nations enjoins (§119). Neither has he any right to
require that I should deny the passage; for he must not pretend tohinder
me from doing what I think agreeable to my duty. And even on those
occasions when I might with justice refuse permission to pass, I am at
liberty to abstain from the exertion of my right. But especially when I
should beobliged tosupportmyrefusalbythesword,whowilltakeupon
him to complain of my having permitted the war to be carried into his
country, rather than draw it on myself? No sovereign can require that I
should take up arms in his favour, unless obliged to it by treaty. But
nations, more attentive to their own interests than to the observance of
strict justice, are often very loud on this pretended subject of complaint.
In war especially, they stick at no measures; and if by their threats they
can induce a neighbouring state to refuse a passage to their enemy, the
generality of their rulers consider this conduct only as a stroke of good
policy.
A powerful state will despisetheseunjustmenaces:ﬁrmandunshaken
in what she thinks due to justice and to her own reputation, she will not
suffer herself to be diverted by the fear of a groundless resentment: she
will not even bear the menace. But a weak nation, unable to support her
rights, will be under a necessity of consulting her own safety; and this
important concern will authorise her to refuse a passage, which would
expose her to dangers too powerful for her to repel.
Another fear may also warrant her in refusing a passage, namely, that
of involving her country in the disorders and calamitiesof war.For,even
if the party against whom a passage is requested, should observe such
moderation as not to employ menaces for the purpose of intimidating
the neutral nation into a <344> refusal, he will hardly fail to demand a
passage for himself also: he will march to meet his enemy; and thus the
neutral country will become the theatre of war. The inﬁnite evilsof such
a situation are an unexceptionable reason for refusing the passage. In all
these cases, he who attempts to force a passage, does an injury to the
neutral nation, and gives her most just cause to unite her armswiththose
§127. No
complaint
lies against a
neutral state
for granting
a passage.
§128. This
state may
refuse it from
a fear of the
resentment of
the opposite
party;
§129. and lest
her country
should become
the theatre
of war.


chapter vii
539
of his adversary. The Switzers, in their alliances with France, haveprom-
ised not to grant a passage to her enemies. They ever refuse it to all sov-
ereigns at war, in order to secure their frontiers from that calamity; and
they take care that their territory shall be respected. But they grant a
passage to recruits, who march in small bodies, and without arms.
The grant of permission to pass includes a grant of every thingwhich
is naturally connected with the passage of troops, and without which
the passage would be impracticable; such as the liberty of carrying with
them whatever may be necessary for an army,—that of exercising mili-
tary discipline on the soldiers and ofﬁcers, and of purchasing at a fair
price every thing the army may want, unless, through fear of scarcity, a
particular exception has been made, to oblige them to carry with them
their own provisions.
He who grants the passage is bound to render it safe, as far as depends
on him. Good-faith requires this: and to act otherwise would be en-
snaring those to whom the passage is granted.
For this reason, and because foreigners can do nothing in a territory
against the will of the sovereign, it is unlawful to attack an enemy in a
neutral country, or to commit in it any other act of hostility. The Dutch
East-India ﬂeet having put into Bergen in Norway, in 1666, to avoid the
English, the British admiral had the temerity to attack them there. But
the governor of Bergen ﬁred ontheassailants;andthecourtof Denmark
complained, though perhaps too faintly, of an attempt so injurious to
her rights and dignity.*
To conduct prisoners, to convey spoil to a place of safety, are acts of
war, consequently not to be done in a neutral country; and whoever
should permit them would depart from the line of neutrality, by fa-
vouring one of the parties. But I here speak of prisoners and spoil not
yet perfectly in the enemy’s power, and whose capture is, as it were, not
yet fully completed. A ﬂying party, for instance, cannot make use of a
neighbouring and neutral country as a place of deposit to secure their
* The author [[Robert Molesworth]] of the “Present State of Denmark,” written
in English, pretends that the Danes had engaged to deliver up the Dutch ﬂeet, but
that some seasonable presents made to the court of Copenhagen saved it. Chap. x.
§130. What
is included
in the grant
of passage.
§131. Safety of
the passage.
§132. No
hostility to be
committed in
a neutral
country.

540
book iii: of war
prisoners and spoil. To permit this, would be giving countenance and
support to their hostilities. When the capture is completed, and the
booty absolutely in the enemy’s power, no inquiry is made how he came
by such effects, and he may dispose of them in a neutral country. A
privateer carries his prize into a neutral port, <345> and there freely sells
it; but he cannot land his prisonersthereforthepurposeof keepingthem
in conﬁnement, because the detention and custody of prisoners of war
is a continuation of hostilities.
On the other hand, it is certain, that, if my neighbour affordsaretreat
to my enemies when defeated and too much weakened to escape me,
and allows them time to recover, and watch a favourable opportunityof
making a second attack on my territories, this conduct, so prejudicial to
my safety and interests, would be incompatible with neutrality. If there-
fore my enemies, on suffering a discomﬁture, retreat into his country,
although charity will not allow him to refuse them permission to pass
in security, he is bound to make them continue their march beyond his
frontiers as soon as possible, and not suffer them to remain in his ter-
ritories on the watch for a convenient opportunity to attack me a-new;
otherwise he gives me a right to enter his country in pursuit of them.
Such treatment is often experienced by nations that are unable to com-
mand respect. Their territories soon become the theatre of war; armies
march, encamp, and ﬁght in it, as in a country open to all comers.
Troops to whom a passage is granted, are not to occasion the least
damage in the country; they are to keep to the public roads, and not
enter the possessions of private persons,—to observe the most exact dis-
cipline, and punctually pay for every thing with which the inhabitants
supply them. And if the licentiousness of the soldiers, or the necessity
of certain operations, as encamping or intrenching, hascausedanydam-
age, their commander or their sovereign is bound to make reparation.
All this requires no proof. What right have an army to injure a country,
when the most they could require was an innocent passage through it?
There can be no reason why the neutral state should not stipulate for
a sum of money as an indemniﬁcation for certain damages which it
would be difﬁcult to estimate, and for the inconveniences naturally re-
sulting from the passage of an army. But it would be scandalous to sell
§133. Neutral
country not to
afford a retreat
to troops, that
they may again
attack their
enemies.
§134. Conduct
to be observed
by troops pass-
ing through a
neutral country.


chapter viii
541
the very grant of passage,—nay even unjust, if the passage be attended
with no damage, since, in that case, the permission is due. As to the rest,
the sovereign of the country is to take care that the compensation be
paid to the parties who have suffered the damage: for no right authorises
him to reserve for his own use what is given for their indemniﬁcation.
It is indeed too often the case that the weak sustain the loss, and the
powerful receive the compensation.
Finally, as we are not bound to grant even an innocent passage except
for just causes, we may refuse it to him who requires it for a war that is
evidently unjust,—as, for instance, to invade a country without any rea-
son, or even colourable pretext. Thus Julius Caesar denied a passage to
the Helvetii, who were quitting their country in order to conquer a bet-
ter. I conceive indeed that policy had a greater share in his refusal, than
the love of justice; but, in short, justice authorised him on that occasion
<346> to obey the dictates of prudence. A sovereign who is in a con-
dition to refuse without fear, should doubtless refuse in the case we now
speak of. But if it would be dangerous for him to give a refusal, he is not
obliged to draw down the impending evil on his own head for the sake
of averting it from that of his neighbour: nay, rashly to hazard the quiet
and welfare of his people would be a very great breach of his duty.
chapter viii
Of the Rights of Nations in War,—and ﬁrst, of
what we have a right to do, and what we are allowed
to do, to the Enemy’s Person in a just War.
What we have hitherto said concerns the right of making war:—let us
now proceed to those rights which are to be respected during the war
itself, and to the rules which nations should reciprocally observe, even
when deciding their differences by arms. Let us begin by laying down
the rights of a nation engaged in a just war: let us see what she is allowed
to do to her enemy. The whole is to be deduced from one single prin-
ciple,—from the object of a just war: for, when the end is lawful, he who
§135. A pas-
sage may be
refused for a
war evidently
unjust.
§136. General
principle of the
rights against
an enemy in
a just war.


542
book iii: of war
has a right to pursue that end, has, of course, a right to employ all the
means which are necessary for its attainment. The end of a just war is
to avenge or prevent injury (§28)—that is to say, to obtain justicebyforce,
when not obtainable by any other method,—to compel an unjust ad-
versary to repair an injury already done, or give us securities against any
wrong with which we are threatened by him. As soon, therefore, as we
have declared war, we have a right to do against the enemy whatever we
ﬁnd necessary for the attainment of thatend,—forthepurposeof bring-
ing him to reason, and obtaining justice and security from him.
The lawfulness of the end does not give us a real right to any thing
further than barely the means necessary for the attainment of that end.
Whatever we dobeyond that, isreprobatedbythelawof nature,isfaulty,
and condemnable at the tribunal of conscience. Hence it is thattheright
to such or such acts of hostility varies according to circumstances.What
is just and perfectly innocent in war in one particular situation, is not
always so on other occasions. Right goes hand in hand with necessity
and the exigency of the case, but never exceeds them.
But as it is very difﬁcult, always to form a precise judgment of what
the present case requires, and as, moreover, it belongs to each nation to
judge of what her own particular situation authorises her to do (Prelim.
§16)—it becomes absolutely necessary that nations should reciprocally
conform to general rules on this <347> subject. Accordingly, whenever
it is certain and evident that such a measure, such an act of hostility, is
necessary in general for overpowering the enemy’s resistance, and at-
taining the end of a lawful war,—that measure, thus viewed in a general
light, is, by the law of nations, deemed lawful in war, and consistent
with propriety, although he who unnecessarily adopts it when he might
attain his end by gentler methods, is not innocent before God and his
own conscience. In this, lies the difference between what is just, equi-
table, irreprehensible in war, and what is only allowed between nations,
and suffered to pass with impunity. The sovereign who would preserve
a pure conscience, and punctually discharge the duties of humanity,
ought never to lose sight of what we already have more than once ob-
served,—that nature gives him no right to make war on his fellow-men,
except in cases of necessity, and as a remedy, ever disagreeable, though
§137. Differ-
ence between
what we have a
right to do and
what is barely
allowed to be
done with im-
punity, be-
tween enemies.


chapter viii
543
often necessary, againstobstinateinjusticeorviolence.If hismindisduly
impressed with this great truth, he will never extend the application of
the remedy beyond its due limits, and will be very careful not to render
it more harsh in its operation, and more fatal to mankind, than is req-
uisite for his own security and the defence of his rights.
Since the object of a just war is to repress injustice and violence, and
forcibly to compel him who is deaf to the voice of justice, we have a
right toputinpractice,againsttheenemy,everymeasurethatisnecessary
in order to weaken him, and disable him from resisting us and sup-
porting his injustice: and we may choose such methods as are the most
efﬁcacious and best calculated to attain the end in view, provided they
be not of an odious kind, nor unjustiﬁable inthemselves,andprohibited
by the law of nature.
The enemy who attacks me unjustly, gives me an undoubted right to
repel his violence; and he who takes up arms to oppose me when I de-
mand only my right, becomes himself the real aggressor by his unjust
resistance: he is the ﬁrst author of the violence, andobligesmetoemploy
forcible means in order to secure myself against the wrong which he
intends to do me either in my person or my property. If the forcible
means I employ produce such effect as even to take away his life,healone
must bear the whole blame of that misfortune: for if I were obliged to
submit to the wrong rather than hurt him, good men would soon be-
come the prey of the wicked. Such is the origin of the right to kill our
enemies in a just war. When we ﬁnd gentler methods insufﬁcienttocon-
quer their resistance and bring them to terms, we have a right to put
them to death. Under the name of enemies, as we have already shewn,
are to be comprehended, not only the ﬁrstauthor of thewar,butlikewise
all those who join him, and who ﬁght in support of his cause.
But the very manner in which the right to kill our enemies is proved,
points out the limits of that right. On an enemy’s submitting and laying
down his arms, we cannot with justice take <348> away his life. Thus,
in a battle, quarter is to be given to those who lay down their arms; and,
in a siege, a garrison offering to capitulate are never to be refused their
lives. The humanity with which most nations in Europe carry on their
wars at present, cannot be too much commended. If sometimes in the
§138. The
right to
weaken an
enemy by
every justiﬁ-
able method.
§139. The
right over
the enemy’s
person.
§140. Limits
of this right.
An enemy not
to be killed
after ceasing
to resist.


544
book iii: of war
heat of action the soldier refuses to give quarter, it is always contrary to
the inclination of the ofﬁcers, who eagerly interpose to save the lives of
such enemies as have laid down their arms.*
There is, however, one case, in which we may refuse to spare the life
of an enemy who surrenders, or to allow any capitulation to a town
reduced to the last extremity. It is when that enemy has been guilty of
some enormous breach of the law of nations, and particularly when he
has violated the laws of war. This refusal of quarter is no natural con-
sequence of the war, but a punishment for his crime,—a punishment
which the injured party has a right to inﬂict. But in order that it be justly
inﬂicted, it must fall on the guilty. When we are at war with a savage
nation, who observe no rules, and never give quarter, we may punish
them in the persons of any of their people whom we take (these be-
longing to the number of the guilty), and endeavour, by this rigorous
proceeding, to force them to respect the laws of humanity. Butwherever
severity is not absolutely necessary, clemency becomes a duty. Corinth
was utterly destroyed24 for having violated the law of nations in the per-
son of the Roman embassadors. That severity, however, was reprobated
by Cicero and other great men. He who has even the most just cause to
punish a sovereign with whom he is in enmity, will ever incur the re-
proach of cruelty, if he causes the punishment to fall on his innocent
subjects. There are other methods of chastising the sovereign,—suchas,
depriving him of some of his rights, taking from him towns and prov-
inces. The evil which thence results to the nation at large, is the conse-
quence of that participation which cannot possibly be avoided by those
who unite in political society.
* From several passages in Grotius’s History of the Disturbances in the Low
Countries, it appears that the war between the Dutch and Spaniards was carried on
with unrelenting cruelty at sea, although the parties had agreed to observe the usual
rules of moderation on land.—Intelligence being received by the confederate states,
that the Spaniards had, by the advice of Spinola, embarked atLisbonabodyof troops
destined for Flanders, they dispatched a squadron to wait for them in the strait of
Calais, with orders to drown without mercy every soldier that was taken; and the
order was punctually executed.—Book xiv. p. 550. [[Note added in 1773/1797
editions.]]
24. In 146 b.c.
§141. A partic-
ular case, in
which quarter
may be refused.


chapter viii
545
This leads us to speak of a kind of retaliation sometimes practised in
war, under the name of reprisals. If the hostile general has, without any
just reason, caused some prisoners to be hanged, we hang an equal num-
ber of his people, and of the same rank,—notifying to him that we will
continue thus to retaliate, for the purpose of obliging him to observe
the laws of war. It is a dreadful extremity thus to condemn a prisoner to
atone, by a miserable death, for his general’s crime: and if we had pre-
viously <349> promised to spare the life of that prisoner, we cannot,
without injustice, make him the subject of our reprisals.* Nevertheless,
as a prince or his general has a right to sacriﬁce his enemies’ lives to his
own safety and that of his men,—it appears, that, if he has to do with
an inhuman enemy who frequently commits such enormities, he is au-
thorised to refuse quarter to some of the prisoners he takes, and to treat
them as his people have been treated.† But Scipio’s generosity is rather
to be imitated:—that great man, having reduced some Spanish princes
who had revolted against the Romans, declared to them that, on a
breach of their faith, he would not call the innocent hostages to an
account, but themselves; and that he would not avenge it on an un-
armed enemy, but on those who should be found in arms.‡ Alexander
the Great, having cause of complaint against Darius for some mal-
practices, sent him word, that if he continued to make war in such a
manner, he would proceed to every extremity againsthim,andgivehim
no quarter.§ It is thus an enemy who violates the laws of war is to be
* In the French, we here ﬁnd (apparently, very much out of place) a verbatim
repetition of the long note which has already appeared in page 286. [[Note added in
1797 edition.]]
† Lysander [[commander of the Spartan ﬂeet, d. 395 b.c.]], having captured the
Athenian ﬂeet, put the prisoners to death, on account of various cruelties practised
by the Athenians during the course of the war, but principally on account of the
barbarous resolution which they were known to have adopted,of cuttingoff theright
hand of every prisoner, in case of victory declaring on their side. He spared Adei-
mantus alone, who had opposed that infamous resolution. Xenoph. Hist. Graec. lib.
ii. cap. 1. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
‡ Neque se in obsides innoxios, sed in ipsos, si defecerint, saeviturum; nec ab
inermi, sed ab armato hoste, poenas expetiturum. Tit. Liv. [[History of Rome]] lib.
xxviii.
§ Quint. Curt. lib. iv. cap. 1 & 11.
§142.
Reprisals.

546
book iii: of war
checked, and not by causing the penalty due to his crime to fall on
innocent victims.
How could it be conceived in an enlightened age, that it is lawful to
punish with death a governor who has defended his town to the last
extremity, or who, in a weak place, has had the courage to hold out
against a royal army? In the last century, this notion still prevailed; it was
looked upon as one of the laws of war, and is not, even at present,totally
exploded. What an idea! to punish a brave man for having performed
his duty! Very different were the principles of AlexandertheGreat,when
he gave orders for sparing some Milesians, on account of their courage
and ﬁdelity.* “As Phyton was led to execution by order of Dionysius the
tyrant for having obstinately defended the town of Rhegium of which
he was governor, he cried out that he was unjustly condemned to die for
having refused to betray the town, and that heaven would soon avenge
his death.” Diodorus Siculus terms this “an unjust punishment.”† It is
in vain to object, that an obstinate defence, especially in a weak place,
against a royal army, only causes a fruitless effusion of blood. Such a
defence may save the state, by delaying the enemy some days longer;and
besides, courage supplies the de-<350>fects of the fortiﬁcations.‡ The
* Arrian. de Exped. Alexand. lib. i. cap. 20.
† Lib. xiv. cap. 113, quoted by Grotius, lib. iii. cap. 2, §16, n. 5 [[Law of War and
Peace]].
‡ The false maxim which formerly prevailed on this subject, is noticed in the re-
lation of the battle of Musselburgh [[1547]] (De Thou [[Jacques Auguste de Thou]],
vol i. p. 287). “The general (the duke of Somerset), the regent of England, was on
this occasion much admired for his clemency, which induced him to spare the lives
of the besieged (the garrison of a castle in Scotland), notwithstanding that ancient
maxim in war which declares that a weak garrison forfeit all claim to mercy on the
part of the conqueror, when, with more courage than prudence, they obstinately
persevere in defending an ill-fortiﬁed place against a royal army, and when, refusing
to accept of reasonable conditions offered to them, they undertake to arrest the pro-
gress of a power which they are unable to resist.”—Pursuant to that maxim, Caesar
answered the Aduatici that he would spare their town, if they surrendered before the
battering-ram touched their walls,—and the duke of Alva strongly blamed Prosper
Colonna for having granted terms of capitulation to the garrison of a castle, whohad
refused to treat of a surrender until the cannon had been employed against them.
[[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§143. Whether
a governor of a
town can be
punished with
death for an
obstinate
defence.


chapter viii
547
chevalier Bayard having thrown himself into Mezieres,25 defended it
with his usual intrepidity,* and proved that a brave man is sometimes
capable of saving a place which another would not think tenable. The
history of the famous siege of Malta26 is another instance how far men
of spirit may defend themselves, when thoroughly determined. How
many places have surrendered, which might still have arrested the en-
emy’s progress for a considerable time, obliged him to consume his
strength andwastetheremainderof thecampaign,andevenﬁnallysaved
themselves, by a better-supported and more vigorous defence?Inthelast
war, whilst the strongest places in the Netherlands opened their gates in
a few days, the valiant general Leutrum wasseentodefendConi27against
the utmost efforts of two powerful armies,—to hold out, in so indiffer-
ent a post, forty days from the opening of the trenches,—and ﬁnally to
save the town, and, together with it, all Pie´mont. If it be urged, that, by
threatening a commandant with death, you may shorten a bloody siege,
spare your troops, and make a valuable saving of time,—my answer is,
that a brave man will despise your menace, or, incensed by such igno-
minious treatment, will sell his life as dearly as he can,—will bury him-
self under the ruins of his fort, and make you pay for your injustice.But
whatever advantage you might promise yourself from an unlawful pro-
ceeding, that will not warrant you in the use of it. The menace of an
unjust punishment is unjust in itself: it is an insult and an injury. But,
above all, it would be horrible and barbarous to put it in execution: and
if you allow that the threatened consequences must not be realised, the
threat is vain and ridiculous. Just and honourable means may be em-
ployed to dissuade a governor from ineffectually persevering to the last
* See his life. [[Champier, Les Gestes, ensemble la vie du preulx chevalier Bayard
(Lyons, 1525).]]
25. The French soldier Pierre Terrail, seigneur de Bayard (1473–1524), defended
Me´zie`res with a tiny force against Charles V’s imperial troops in 1521.
26. Between May and September 1565, the knights of Saint John of Jerusalem
held Malta against the Ottoman Turks.
27. Karl Sigismond Friedrick Wilhelm Leutrum (1692–1755), commanding Pied-
montese troops, defended the city of Coneo against Franco-Spanish forces in 1744
during the War of the Austrian Succession.


548
book iii: of war
extremity: and such is the present practice of all prudent and humane
generals. At a proper stage of the business, they summon a governor to
surrender; they offer him honourable and advantageous terms of capit-
ulation,—accompanied by a threat, that, if he delays too long, he will
only be admitted to surrender as a prisoner of war, <351> and at discre-
tion. If he persists, and is at length forced to surrender at discretion,—
they may then treat both himself and his troops with all the severity of
the law of war. But that law can never extend so far as to give a right to
take away the life of an enemy who lays down his arms (§140), unless he
has been guilty of some crime against the conqueror (§141).
Resistance carried to extremity does not become punishable in a sub-
altern, except on those occasions only when it is evidently fruitless. It is
then obstinacy, and not ﬁrmness or valour:—true valour has always a
reasonable object in view. Let us, for instance, suppose that a state has
entirely submitted to the conqueror’s arms, except one singlefortress,—
that no succour is to be expected from without,—no neighbour, no ally,
concerns himself about saving the remainder of that conqueredstate:—
on such an occasion, the governor is to be made acquainted with the
situation of affairs, and summoned to surrender; and he may be threat-
ened with death in case of his persisting in a defence which is absolutely
fruitless, and which can only tend to the effusion of human blood.*
Should this make no impression on him, he deserves to suffer the pun-
ishment with which he has been justly threatened. I suppose the justice
of the war to be problematical, and that it is not an insupportable op-
pression which he opposes: for if this governor maintains a cause that is
* But it is not lawful to employ menaces of every kind in order to induce the
governor or commandant of a town to surrender. There are some, against which
nature revolts with horror.—Louis the Eleventh, being engaged in the siege of St.
Omer, and incensed at the long resistance he experienced, informed the governor,
Philip, son of Antony the Bastard of Burgundy, that, if he did not surrender the
place, his father, (who was a prisoner in Louis’s hands) should be put to death in his
sight. Philip replied that he would feel the most poignant regret to lose his father, but
that his honour was still dearer to him, and that he was too well acquainted with the
king’s disposition, to apprehend that he would disgrace himself by the perpetration
of so barbarous a deed. [[Charles Pineau-Duclos,]] Hist. of Louis XI. book viii.
[[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]


chapter viii
549
evidently just,—if he ﬁghts to save his country from slavery,—his mis-
fortune will be pitied; and every man of spirit will applaud him for gal-
lantly persevering to the last extremity, and determining to die free.
Fugitives and deserters, found by the victor among his enemies, are
guilty of a crime against him; and he has undoubtedly a right to put
them to death. But they are not properly considered as enemies: they are
rather perﬁdious citizens, traitors to their country; and their enlistment
with the enemy cannot obliterate that character, or exempt them from
the punishment they have deserved. At present, however, desertionbe-
ing unhappily too common, the number of the delinquents renders it
in some measure necessary to shew clemency; and, in capitulations, it is
usual to indulge the evacuating garrison with a certain number of cov-
ered waggons, in which they save the deserters.
Women, children, feeble old men, and sick persons, come under the
description of enemies (§§70, 72); and we have certain <352> rightsover
them, inasmuch as they belong to the nation with whom we are at war,
and as, between nation and nation, all rights and pretensions affect the
body of the society, together with all its members (Book II. §§81, 82,
344). But these are enemies who make no resistance; and consequently
we have no right to maltreat their persons, or use any violence against
them, much less to take away their lives (§140). This is so plain a maxim
of justice and humanity, that at present every nation, in the least degree
civilised, acquiesces in it. If sometimes the furious and ungovernable
soldier carries his brutality so far as to violate female chastity, or to mas-
sacre women, children, and old men, the ofﬁcers lament those excesses:
they exert their utmost efforts to put a stop to them; and a prudent and
humane general even punishes them whenever he can. But if thewomen
wish to be spared altogether, they must conﬁne themselves to the oc-
cupations peculiar to their own sex, and not meddle with those of men
by taking up arms. Accordingly the military law of the Switzers, which
forbids the soldier to maltreat women, formally excepts those females
who have committed any acts of hostility.*
* See Simler, de Repub. Helvet.
§144. Fugi-
tives and
deserters.
§145. Women,
children, the
aged, and sick.


550
book iii: of war
The like may be said of the public ministers of religion, of men of
letters, and otherpersonswhosemodeof lifeisveryremotefrommilitary
affairs:—not that these people, nor even the ministers of the altar, are,
necessarily and by virtue of their functions, invested with any character
of inviolability, or that the civil law can confer it on them with respect
to the enemy: but as they do not use force or violence to oppose him,
they do not give him a right to use it against them. Among the ancient
Romans the priests carried arms: Julius Caesar himself was sovereign
pontiff:—and, among the christians, it has been no rare thing to see
prelates, bishops, and cardinals, buckle on their armour, and take the
command of armies. From the instant of their doing so, they subjected
themselves to the common fate of military men. While dealing outtheir
blows in the ﬁeld of battle, they did not, it is to be presumed, lay claim
to inviolability.
Formerly, every one capable of carrying arms became a soldier when
his nation was at war, and especially when it was attacked. Grotius how-
ever* produces instances of several nations and eminent commanders†
who spared the peasantry in consideration of the immediate usefulness
of their labours.‡ At present war is carried on by regular troops: the peo-
ple, the peasants, the citizens, take no part in it, and generally havenoth-
ing to fearfrom theswordof theenemy.Providedtheinhabitantssubmit
to him who is master of the country, pay the contributions im-
<353>posed, and refrain from all hostilities, they live in as perfect safety
as if they were friends: they even continue in possession of what belongs
to them: the country people come freely to the camp to sell their pro-
visions, and are protected, as far as possible, from the calamities of war.
A laudable custom, truly worthy of those nations who value themselves
on their humanity, and advantageous even to the enemy who acts with
such moderation. By protecting the unarmed inhabitants, keeping the
soldiery under strict discipline, and preserving the country, a general
* Book iii. ch. 11. §11 [[Law of War and Peace]].
† Cyrus [[Cyrus the Great, founder of the Persian Empire, r. 576–529 b.c.]], Bel-
isarius [[Flavius, Byzantine general serving under Justinian I, a.d. 505–65]], &c.
‡ Cyrus proposedtothekingof Assyria,thatbothpartiesshouldreciprocallyspare
the cultivators of the soil, and make war only against those who appeared in arms:—
and the proposal was agreed to. Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. v. cap. 4.
§146. Clergy,
men of letters,
&c.
§147. Peas-
ants, and, in
general, all
who do not
carry arms.


chapter viii
551
procures an easy subsistence for his army, and avoids many evils and
dangers. If he has any reason to mistrust the peasantry and the inhabi-
tants of the towns, he has a right to disarm them, and to requirehostages
from them: and those who wish to avoid the calamities of war, must
submit to the laws which the enemy thinks proper to impose on them.
But all those enemies thus subdued or disarmed, whom the principles
of humanity oblige him to spare,—all those persons belonging to the
opposite party (even the women and children), he may lawfully secure
and make prisoners, either with a view to prevent them from taking up
arms again, or for the purpose of weakening the enemy (§138),or,ﬁnally,
in hopes that, by getting into his power some woman or child for whom
the sovereign has an affection, he may induce him to accede to equitable
conditions of peace, for the sake of redeeming those valuable pledges.
At present, indeed, this last-mentioned expedient is seldom put in prac-
tice by the polished nations of Europe: women and children are suffered
to enjoy perfect security, and allowed permission to withdraw wherever
they please. But this moderation, this politeness, though undoubtedly
commendable, is not in itself absolutely obligatory; and if a general
thinks ﬁt to supersede it, he cannot be justly accused of violating the
laws of war. He is at liberty to adopt such measures in this respect as he
thinks most conducive to the success of his affairs. If, without reason,
and from mere caprice, he refuses to indulge women with this liberty,
he will be taxed with harshness and brutality,—he will be censured for
not conforming to a custom established by humanity: but he may have
good reasons for disregarding, in this particular, the rules of politeness,
and even the suggestionsof pity.If therearehopesof reducingbyfamine
a strong place of which it is very important togainpossession,theuseless
mouths are not permitted to come out. And in this there is nothing
which is not authorised by the laws of war. Some great men, however,
have, on occasions of this nature, carried their compassion so far as to
postpone their interests to the motions of humanity. We have already
mentioned in another place how Henry the Great acted during the siege
of Paris. To such a noble example let us add that of Titus at the siege
of Jerusalem:28 at ﬁrst he was inclined to drive back into the city great
28. Siege of Jerusalem, a.d. 70.
§148. The
right of
making pris-
oners of war.

552
book iii: of war
numbers of starving wretches, who came out of it: but he could not
withstand the <354> compassion which such a sight raised in him; and
he suffered the sentiments of humanity and generosity to prevail over
the maxims of war.
As soon as your enemy has laid down his arms and surrendered his
person, you have no longer any right over his life(§140),unlessheshould
give you such right by some new attempt, or had before committed
against you a crime deserving death (§141). It was therefore a dreadful
error of antiquity, a most unjust and savage claim, to assume a right of
putting prisoners of war to death, and even by the hand of the execu-
tioner. More just and humane principles,however,havelongsincebeen
adopted. Charles I. king of Naples,29 having defeated and taken pris-
oner Conradin30 his competitor, caused him to be publicly beheaded
at Naples, together with Frederic of Austria, his fellow-prisoner. This
barbarity raised a universal horror; and Peter the Third, king of Ar-
ragon,31 reproached Charles with it as a detestable crime, and till then
unheard of among christian princes.* The case, however, was that of
a dangerous rival who contended with him for the throne. But sup-
posing even the claims of that rival were unjust, Charles might have
kept him in prison till he had renounced them, and given security for
his future behaviour.
Prisoners may be secured; and, for this purpose, they may be put into
conﬁnement, and even fettered if there be reason to apprehend thatthey
will rise on their captors, or make their escape. But they are not to be
treated harshly, unless personally guilty of some crime against him who
has them in his power. In this case he is at liberty to punish them: oth-
* Epist. Pet. Arrag apud Petr. de Vineis. [[Petrus de Vineis is Pierre de la Vigne
(ca. 1190–1249), chancellor of Frederic II of Hohenstauffen. The letter from Peter III,
king of Aragon, is in a collection that has not been identiﬁed.]]
29. Charles I of Naples, r. 1266–85.
30. Conradin, or Conrad V (1252–68), the last of the Hohenstaufen line, held the
duchy of Swabia from 1262 and considered himself to be king of Jerusalem and of
Sicily. Upon his defeat by Charles I of Naples, he was tried and beheaded.
31. Peter III of Aragon, r. 1276–85.
§149. A pris-
oner of war
not to be put
to death.
§150. How
prisoners of
war are to
be treated.
chapter viii
553
erwise he should remember that they are men, and unfortunate.* A man
of exalted soul no longer feels any emotions but those of compassion
towards a conquered enemy who has submitted to his arms. Let us in
this particular bestow on the European nations the praise to which they
are justly entitled. Prisoners of war are seldom ill treated among them.
We extol the English and French, we feel our bosoms glow with love for
them, when we hear the accounts of the treatment which prisoners of
war, on both sides, have experienced from those generous nations. And
what is more, by a custom which equally displays the honour and hu-
manity of the Europeans, an ofﬁcer, taken prisoner in war, is released
on his <355> parole, and enjoys the comfort of passing the time of his
captivity in his own country, in the midst of his family; and the party
who have thus released him, rest as perfectly sure of him, as if they had
him conﬁned in irons.
Formerly a question of an embarrassing nature might have been pro-
posed. When we have so great a number of prisoners that we ﬁnd it
impossible to feed them, or to keep them with safety, have we a right to
put them to death? or shall we send them back to the enemy,—thus
increasing his strength, and exposing ourselves to the hazard of being
overpowered by him on a subsequent occasion? At present the case is
attended with no difﬁculty. Such prisoners are dismissed on their pa-
role,—bound by promise not to carry arms for a certain time or during
the continuance of the war. And as every commander necessarily has a
power of agreeing to the conditions on which the enemy admits his sur-
* In 1593, the council of the Netherlands, at the persuasion of the count de Fu-
entes, resolved no longer to observe towards the United Provinces that moderation
which humanity renders so necessary in war. They gave orders for putting to death
every man who should be made prisoner, and, under the same penalty, prohibited
the payment of any contributions to the enemy. But the complaints of the nobility
and clergy, and, still more, the murmurs of the military, who saw themselvesexposed
to an infamous death in case of falling into the enemy’s hands, obliged the Spaniards
to re-establish those indispensable usages, which, in the words of Virgil [Aen. x. 532],
are called belli commercia,—the ransom or exchange of prisoners, and the payment
of contributions to avert pillage and devastation. The ransom of each prisoner was
then settled at a month’s pay. Grotius, Hist. of Netherlands, book iii. [[Note added
in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§151. Whether
prisoners, who
cannot be kept
or fed, may be
put to death.


554
book iii: of war
render, the engagements entered into by him for saving his life or his
liberty with that of his men, are valid, as being made within the limits
of his powers (§§19, &c.); and his sovereign cannot annul them. Of this
many instances occurred during the last war:32—severalDutchgarrisons
submitted to the condition of not serving against France or her allies,
for one or two years: a body of French troops being invested in Lintz,
were by capitulation sent back across the Rhine, under a restriction not
to carry arms against the queen of Hungary for a stated time: and the
sovereigns of those troops respected the engagements formed by them.
But conventions of this kind have their limits, which consist in not in-
fringing the rights of the sovereign over his subjects. Thus the enemy,
inreleasingprisoners,mayimposeonthemtheconditionof notcarrying
arms against him till the conclusion of the war; since he might justly
keep them in conﬁnement till that period: but he cannot require that
they shall for ever renounce the liberty of ﬁghting for their country;
because, on the termination of the war, he has no longer any reason for
detaining them; and they, on theirpart,cannotenterintoanengagement
absolutely inconsistent with their character of citizens or subjects. If
their country abandons them, they become free in that respect, and have
in their turn a right to renounce their country.
But if we have to do with a nation that is at once savage, perﬁdious,
and formidable, shall we send her back a number of soldiers who will
perhaps enable her todestroy us?—Whenourownsafetyisincompatible
with that of an enemy—even of an enemy who has submitted,—the
question admits not of a doubt. But to justify us in coolly and delib-
erately putting to death a great number of prisoners, the following con-
ditions are indispensably necessary:—1. that no promise havebeenmade
to spare their lives; and, 2. that we be perfectly assured that our own
safety demands such a sacriﬁce. If it is at all consistent with prudence
either to trust to their parole or to disregard their perﬁdy, a generous
enemy will rather listen to the voice of huma-<356>nity than to that of
a timid circumspection. Charles the Twelfth, being incumbered withhis
32. War of the Austrian Succession.


chapter viii
555
prisoners after the battle of Narva,33 only disarmed them and set them
at liberty: but his enemy, still impressed with the apprehensions which
his warlike and formidable opponents had excited in his mind, sent into
Siberia all the prisoners he took at Pultowa. The Swedish hero conﬁded
too much in his own generosity: the sagacious monarch of Russiaunited
perhaps too great a degree of severity with his prudence: but necessity
furnishes an apology for severity, or ratherthrows aveiloveritaltogether.
When admiral Anson took the rich Acapulco galleon near Manilla, he
found that the prisoners outnumbered his whole ship’s company: he
was therefore under a necessity of conﬁning them in the hold, where
they suffered cruel distress.* But, had he exposed himself to the risk of
being carried away a prisoner, with his prize and his own ship together,
would the humanity of his conduct have justiﬁed the imprudence of it?
Henry V. king of England, after his victory in the battle of Agincourt,
was reduced, or thought himself reduced, to the cruel necessity of sac-
riﬁcing the prisoners to his own safety. “In this universal route,” says
Father Daniel, “a fresh misfortune happened, which cost the lives of a
great number of French. A remainder of theirvan wasretreatinginsome
order, and many of the stragglers rallied and joined it. The king of En-
gland, observing their motions from an eminence, supposed it was their
intention to return to the charge. At the same moment he received in-
formation of an attack being made on his camp where the baggage was
deposited. In fact, some noblemen of Picardy, having armed about six
hundred peasants, had fallen upon the English camp. Thus circum-
stanced, that prince, apprehensiveof somedisastrousreverse,dispatched
his aides-de-camp to the different divisions of the army, with orders for
putting all the prisoners to the sword, lest, in case of a renewal of the
battle, the care of guarding them should prove an impediment to his
soldiers, or the prisoners should escape, and join their countrymen.The
order was immediately carried into execution, and all the prisoners were
* See Anson’s Voyage round the World.
33. Charles XII of Sweden (r. 1697–1718) defeated the forces of Czar Peter the
Great at Narva in 1700 during the Great Northern War (1700–21).


556
book iii: of war
put to the sword.”* Nothing short of the greatest necessity can justify
so terrible an execution; and the general whose situation requires it, is
greatly to be pitied.
Is it lawful to condemn prisoners of war to slavery? Yes, incaseswhich
give a right to kill them,—when they have rendered themselves person-
ally guilty of some crime deserving of death. The ancients used to sell
their prisoners of war for slaves. They indeed thought they had a right
to put them to death. In every circumstance, when I cannot innocently
take away my prisoner’s life, I have no right to make him a slave. If I
spare his life and condemn him to a state so contrary to the nature of
<357> man, I still continue with him the state of war. He lies under no
obligation to me: for, what is life without freedom? If any one counts
life a favour when the grant of it is attended with chains,—be it so: let
him accept the kindness, submit to the destiny which awaits him, and
fulﬁl the duties annexed to it. But he must apply to some other writer
to teach him those duties: there have been authors enough who have
amply treated of them. I shall dwell no longer on the subject:andindeed
that disgrace to humanity is happily banished from Europe.
Prisoners of war, then, are detained, either to prevent their returning
to join the enemy again, or with a view to obtain from their sovereign a
just satisfaction, as the price of their liberty. There is no obligation to
release those who are detained with the latter view, till after satisfaction
is obtained. As to the former, whoever makes a just war, has a right, if
he thinks proper, to detain his prisoners till the end of the war: and
whenever he releases them, he may justly require a ransom, either as a
compensation at the conclusion of a peace, or, if duringthecontinuance
of the war, for the purpose of at least weakening his enemy’s ﬁnances at
the same time that he restores him a number of soldiers. The European
nations, who are ever to be commended for their care in alleviating the
evils of war, have, with regard to prisoners, introduced humane and sal-
utary customs. They are exchanged or ransomed, even during the war;
and this point is generally settled beforehand by cartel. However, if a
nation ﬁnds a considerable advantage in leaving her soldiers prisoners
* [[Daniel]] Hist. of France, reign of Charles VI.
§152. Whether
prisoners of
war may be
made slaves.
§153.
Exchange and
ransom of
prisoners.


chapter viii
557
with the enemy during the war rather than exchanging them, she may
certainly, unless bound by cartel, act in that respect as is most conducive
to her interest. Such would be the case of a state abounding in men, and
at war with a nation more formidable by the courage than the number
of her soldiers. It would have ill suited the interests of the czar Peter the
Great, to restore his prisoners to the Swedes for an equal number of
Russians.
But the state is bound to procure, at her own expense, the release of
her citizens and soldiers who are prisoners of war, as soon as she has the
means of accomplishing it, and can do it without danger. It was only by
acting in her service and supporting her cause, that they were involved
in their present misfortune. For the same reason, it is her duty to provide
for their support during the time of their captivity. Formerly prisoners
of war were obliged to redeem themselves: but then the ransom of all
those whom the ofﬁcers or soldiers might take, was the perquisite of the
individual captors. The modern custom is more agreeable to reason and
justice. If prisoners cannot be delivered during the course of the war, at
least their liberty must, if possible, make an article in the treaty of peace.
This is a care which the state owes to those who have exposedthemselves
in her defence. It must, nevertheless, be allowed, that a nation may, after
the example of the Romans, and for the purpose of stimulating her sol-
diers to the most vigorous resistance, enact a law to prohibit prisoners
of war from <358> ever being ransomed. When this is agreed to by the
whole society, nobody can complain. But such a law is very severe, and
could scarce suit any but those ambitious heroes who were determined
on sacriﬁcing every thing in order to make themselves masters of the
world.
Since the present chapter treats of the rights which war gives us over
the person of the enemy, this is the proper place to discuss a celebrated
question on which authors have been much divided,—and that is,
whether we may lawfully employ all sorts of means to take away an en-
emy’s life? whether we be justiﬁable in procuring his death by assassi-
nation or poison? Some writers have asserted, that, where we have aright
to take away life, the manner is indifferent.Astrangemaxim!buthappily
exploded by the bare ideas of honour, confused and indeﬁnite as they
§154. The
state is bound
to procure
their release.
§155. Whether
an enemy may
lawfully be
assassinated
or poisoned.

558
book iii: of war
are. In civil society, I have a right to punish a slanderer,—to cause my
property to be restored by him who unjustly detains it: but shall the
manner be indifferent? Nations may do themselves justice sword in
hand, when otherwise refused to them: shall it be indifferent to human
society that they employ odious means, capable of spreading desolation
over the whole face of the earth, and against which, the most just and
equitable of sovereigns, even though supported by the majority of other
princes, cannot guard himself?
But in order to discuss this question on solid grounds, assassination
is by all means to be distinguished from surprises, which are, doubtless,
very allowable in war. Should a resolute soldier steal into the enemy’s
camp by night,—should he penetrate to the general’s tent, and stab
him,—in such conduct there is nothing contrary to the natural laws of
war,— nothing even but what is perfectly commendable in a just and
necessary war. Mutius Scaevola34 has been praised by all the great men
of antiquity; and Porsenna himself, whom he intended to kill, couldnot
but commend his courage.* Pepin,35 father of Charlemagne, having
crossed the Rhine with one of his guards, went and killed his enemy in
his chamber.† If any one has absolutely condemned such bold strokes,
his censure only proceeded from a desire to ﬂatter those amongthegreat,
who would wish to leave all the dangerous part of war to the soldiery
and inferior ofﬁcers. It is true indeed that the agents in such attempts
are usually punished with some painful death. But that is because the
prince or general who is thus attacked, exercises hisownrightsinturn,—
has an eye to his own safety, and endeavours, by the dread of a cruel
punishment, to deter his enemies from attacking him otherwise than by
open force. He may proportion his severity towards an enemy according
as his own safety requires. Indeed it would be more commendable on
both sides to renounce every kind of hos-<359>tility which lays the en-
* See Livy, lib. ii. cap. 12.—Cicero, pro P. Sextio.—Valer. Max. lib. iii. cap. 3.—
Plutarch, in Poplicol.
† Grotius, lib. iii. cap. 4, §18, n. 1 [[Law of War and Peace]].
34. Gaius Mucius Scaevola, ca. sixth century b.c., in Roman legend the hero who
saved Rome from Porsenna’s Etruscans.
35. Pepin the Younger, 714–68, king of the Franks 751–58.
chapter viii
559
emy under a necessity of employingcruelpunishmentsinordertosecure
himself against it. This might be made an established custom,—a con-
ventional law of war. The generous warriors of the present age dislike
such attempts, and would never willingly undertake them, except on
those extraordinary occasions when they become necessary to the very
safety and being of their country. As to the six hundred Lacedaemonians,
who, under the conduct of Leonidas,36 broke into the enemy’s camp,
and made their way directly to the Persian monarch’s37 tent,* their ex-
pedition was justiﬁable by the common rules of war, and did not au-
thorise the king to treat them more rigorously than any other enemies.
In order to defeat all such attempts, it is sufﬁcient to keep a strict watch;
and it would be unjust to have recourse to cruel punishments for that
purpose: accordingly such punishments are reserved for those only who
gain admittance by stealth, alone or in very small number, and especially
if under cover of a disguise.
I give, then, the name of assassination to a treacherous murder,
whether the perpetrators of the deed be subjects of the party whom we
cause to be assassinated, or of our own sovereign,—orthatitbeexecuted
by the hand of any other emissary, introducing himself as a supplicant,
a refugee, a deserter, or, in ﬁne, as a stranger; and such an attempt, I say,
is infamous and execrable, both in him who executes and in him who
commands it. Why do we judge an act to be criminal, and contrary to
the law of nature, but because such act is pernicious to human society,
and that the practice of it would be destructive to mankind? Now what
could be more terrible than the custom of hiring a traitor to assassinate
our enemy? Besides, were such a liberty once introduced, the purest vir-
tue, the friendship of the majority of the reigning sovereigns, would no
longer be sufﬁcient to ensure a prince’s safety. Had Titus lived in the
time of the old man of the mountain, 38—though the happiness of man-
* Justin. [[Digest.]] lib. ii. cap. xi.
36. Leonidas, king of Sparta, ca. 489 b.c.
37. Xerxes I of Persia, r. 485–465 b.c.
38. The reference is to Hasan ibn al-Sabbah, founder of the Assassins, a secret
order of the Ismaili sect of Islam. Folklore called him the Old Man of the Mountain.


560
book iii: of war
kind centred in him,—though, punctual in the observance of peaceand
equity, he was respected and adored by all potentates,—yet, theveryﬁrst
time that the prince of the Assassins might have thought proper toquar-
rel with him, that universal affection would have proved insufﬁcient to
save him; and mankind would have lost their “darling.” Let it not here
be replied that it is only in favour of the cause of justice that such ex-
traordinary measures are allowable: for all parties, intheirwars,maintain
that they have justice on their side. Whoever, by setting the example,
contributes to the introductionof sodestructiveapractice,declareshim-
self the enemy of mankind, and deserves the execration of all ages.*The
assassination of William prince of Orange <360> was regarded with
universal detestation, though the Spaniards had declared that prince a
rebel. And the same nation denied, as an atrocious calumny, the charge
of having had the least concern in that of Henry the Great, who was
preparing for a war against them, which might have shaken their mon-
archy to its very foundations.
In treacherously administering poison there is something still more
odious than in assassination: it would be more difﬁcult to guard against
the consequences of such an attempt; and the practice would be more
dreadful; accordingly it has been more generally detested. Of this Gro-
tius has accumulated many instances.† The consuls Caius Fabricius and
* See the dialogue between Julius Caesar and Cicero, in the Me´langes de Litte´r-
ature et Poe´sies.—Farrudge, sultan of Egypt, sent to Timur-bec an embassador ac-
companied by two villains who were to assassinate that conqueror during the audi-
ence. This infamous plot being discovered—“It is not (said Timur) the maxim of
kings to put embassadors to death: but as to this wretch, who, under the sacred garb
of religion, is a monster of perﬁdy and corruption, it would be a crime to suffer him
and his accomplices to live.” Pursuant, therefore, to that passage of the Koran which
says that “treachery falls on the traitor’s own head,” he ordered him to be dispatched
with the same poignard with which he had intended to perpetrate the abominable
deed. The body of the traitor was then committed to the ﬂames, as an example to
others. The two assassins were only condemned to suffer the amputation of their
noses and ears,—Timur contenting himself with this punishment, and forbearingto
put them to death, because he wished to send them back with a letter to the sultan.
[[La Croix.]] Hist. of Timur-bec, book v. chap. 24. [[Note added in 1773/1797
editions.]]
† Book iii. chap. 4, §15 [[Law of War and Peace]].


chapter viii
561
Quintus Aemilius rejected with horror the proposal of Pyrrhus’s39 phy-
sician who made an offer of poisoning his master: they even cautioned
that prince to be on his guard against the traitor,—haughtily adding, “It
is not to ingratiate ourselves with you that we give this information, but
to avoid the obloquy to which your death would expose us.”* And they
justly observe in the same letter, that it is for the common interest of all
nations not to set such examples.† It was a maxim of the Roman senate,
that war was to be carried on with arms, and not with poison.‡ Even
under Tiberius,40 the proposal of the prince of the Catti was rejected,
who offered to destroy Arminius41 if poison were sent him for that pur-
pose: and he received for answer, that “it was the practice of the Romans
to take vengeance on their enemies by open force, and not by treachery
and secret machinations”;§ Tiberius thus making it his glory to imitate
the virtue of the ancient Roman commanders. This instance is the more
remarkable, as Arminius had treacherously cutoff Varus,42togetherwith
three Roman legions. The senate, and even Tiberius himself, thought it
unlawful to adopt the use of poison, even against a perﬁdious enemy,
and as a kind of retaliation or reprisals.
* Oude gar tauta sv xariti mhnuomen, all◊oÿpwc mh to son pajoc hÿmin diabolhn
enegkv, Plut. in Pyrr.
† Sed communis exempli et ﬁdei ergo visum est, uti te salvum velimus; ut esset,
quem armis vincere possemus. [[“But as a matter of general precedent and honor, it
has seemed to us that we should desire your personal safety, in order that we may
have the opportunity of vanquishing you in the ﬁeld.”]] Aul. Gell. Noct Attic. lib.
iii. cap 8.
‡ Armis bella, non venenis, geri debere. [[“War is to be fought with arms, not
poison.”]] Valer. Maxim. lib. vi. ch. 5, num. 1.
§ Non fraude, neque occultis, sed palam, et armatum,populumRomanumhostes
suos ulcisci. Tacit. Annal. lib. ii. cap. 88.
39. Caius Luscinus Fabricius served as consul in 282 and 278 b.c. with Quintus
Aemilius Papus. In 280 b.c. while serving as ambassadors from Rome, they rejected
the approach of the physician employed by the Molossian king Pyrrhus of Epirus.
40. Emperor Tiberius, r. a.d. 14–37.
41. Arminius, chief of the Cherusci, defeated Varus and his Roman army at Teu-
toburg Forest in a.d. 9.
42. Publius Quinctilius Varus, 46 b.c.–a.d. 9, military governorappointedbyAu-
gustus, died at the battle of Teutoburg Forest.


562
book iii: of war
Assassination and poisoning are therefore contrary to the laws of war,
and equally condemned by the law of nature, and the <361> consent of
all civilised nations. The sovereign who has recourse to such execrable
means, should be regarded as the enemy of the human race; and the
common safety of mankind calls on all nations to unite againsthim,and
join their forces to punish him. His conduct particularly authorises the
enemy whom he has attacked by such odious means, to refuse him any
quarter. Alexander declared that “he was determined to proceed to the
utmost extremities against Darius, and no longer to consider him as a
fair enemy, but as a poisoner and an assassin.”*
The interest and safety of men in high command require, that, so far
from countenancing the introduction of such practices, they should use
all possible care to prevent it. It was wisely said by Eumenes,43 that “he
did not think any general wished to obtain a victory in such manner as
should set a pernicious example which might recoil on himself.”† And
it was on the same principle that Alexander formed his judgment of
Bessus,44 who had assassinated Darius.‡45
The use of poisoned weapons may beexcusedordefendedwithalittle
more plausibility. At least there is no treachery in the case, noclandestine
machination. But the practice is nevertheless prohibited by the law of
nature, which does not allow us to multiply the evils of war beyond all
bounds. You must of course strike your enemy in order to get the better
of his efforts: but if he is once disabled, is it necessary that he should
* Quint. Curt. lib. iv. cap. 11, num. 18.
† Nec Antigonum, nec quemquam ducum, sic velle vincere, ut ipse in se exem-
plum pessimum statuat. Justin. [[Digest]] lib. xiv. cap. 1, num. 12.
‡ Quem quidem [Bessum] cruci adﬁxum videre festino, omnibus regibus genti-
busque ﬁdei, quam violavit, meritas poenas solventem. [[“I am assuredly in haste to
see him (Bessus) nailed to a cross, paying the penalty he has deserved to all kings and
nations for the loyalty which he has dishonoured.”]] Q. Curt. lib. vi. ch. 3, num. 14.
43. Eumenes of Cardia, 362–316 b.c., Greek scholar and general, served under
Alexander the Great.
44. Bessus, Persian nobleman who proclaimed himself king after murdering
Darius III.
45. Darius III, king of Persia 336–330 b.c., deposed by Alexander prior to being
assassinated by Bessus.
§156. Whether
poisoned
weapons may
be used in war.


chapter viii
563
inevitably die of his wounds? Besides, if you poison your weapons, the
enemy will follow your example; and thus, without gaining any advan-
tage on your side for the decision of the contest, you have only added
to the cruelty and calamities of war. It is necessity alone that can at all
justify nations in making war: they ought universally to abstain from
every thing that has a tendency to render it more destructive: it is even
a duty incumbent on them, to oppose such practices. It is thereforewith
good reason, and in conformity to their duty, that civilised nations have
classed among the laws of war the maxim which prohibits the poisoning
of weapons;* and they are all warranted by their common safety to re-
press and punish the ﬁrst who should offer to break through that law.
A still more general unanimity prevails in condemning the practice
of poisoning waters, wells, and springs, because (say some authors) we
may thereby destroy innocent persons,—we may destroy other people
as well as our enemies. This is indeed an additional reason: but it is not
the only nor even the true one; forwedonotscrupletoﬁreonanenemy’s
<362> ship, although there be neutral passengers on board. But though
poison is not to be used, it is very allowable to divert the water,—to cut
off the springs,—or by any other means to render them useless, that the
enemy may be reduced to surrender.† This is a milder way than that of
arms.
I cannot conclude this subject, of what we have a right to do against
the person of the enemy, without speaking a few words concerning the
dispositions we ought to preserve towards him. They may already be
deduced fromwhatIhave hithertosaid,andespeciallyintheﬁrstchapter
of the second book. Let us never forget that our enemies are men.
Though reduced to the disagreeable necessity of prosecuting our right
by force of arms, let us not divest ourselves of that charity which con-
nects us with all mankind. Thus shall we courageously defend ourcoun-
try’s rights without violating those of human nature.‡ Let our valour
* Grotius, book iii. chap. 4, §16 [[Law of War and Peace]].
† Grotius, ibid. §17 [[Law of War and Peace]].
‡ The laws of justice and equity are not to be less respected even in time of war.
The following I quote as a remarkable instance.Alcibiades,attheheadof anAthenian
§157. Whether
springs may
be poisoned.
§158. Disposi-
tions to be
preserved
towards an
enemy.

564
book iii: of war
preserve itself from every stain of cruelty, and the lustre of victory will
not be tarnished by inhuman and brutal actions. Marius46 and Attila47
are now detested; whereas we cannot forbear admiring and loving Cae-
sar; his generosity and clemency almost tempt us to overlook the injus-
tice of his undertaking. Moderation and generosityredoundmoretothe
glory of a victor, than his courage; they are more certain marks of an
exalted soul. Besides the honour which infallibly accompanies thosevir-
tues, humanity towards an enemy has been often attended with im-
mediate and real advantages. Leopold, duke of Austria, besieging So-
leure in the year 1318, threw a bridge over the Aar, and posted on it a
large body of troops. Soon after, the river having, by an extraordinary
swell of its waters, carried away the bridge together with those who were
stationedonit,—thebesiegedhastenedtotherelief of thoseunfortunate
men, and saved the greatest part of them. Leopold, relenting at this act
of generosity, raised the siege and made peace with the city.* The duke
of Cumberland, after his victory at Dettingen,† appears to me still
greater than in the heat of battle. As he was under the surgeon’s hands,
a French ofﬁcer, much more dangerously <363> wounded than himself,
being brought that way, the duke immediately ordered his surgeon to
army, was engaged in the siege of Byzantium, then occupied by a Lacedaemonian
garrison; and ﬁnding that he could not reduce the city by force, he gained over some
of the inhabitants, who put him in possession of it. One of the persons concerned
in this transaction was Anaxilau¨s, a citizen of Byzantium, who, being afterwards
brought to trial for it at Lacedaemon, pleaded, in his defence, that, in surrendering
the city, he had not acted through ill-will to the Lacedaemonians, or under the inﬂu-
ence of a bribe, but with a view to save the women and children, whom he saw
perishing with famine, for Clearchus, who commanded the garrison, had given to
the soldiers all the corn that was found in the city. The Lacedaemonians, with a noble
regard to justice, and such as seldom prevails on similar occasions, acquitted the cul-
prit,—observing that he had not betrayed but saved the city,—and particularly at-
tending to the circumstance of his being a Byzantine, not a Lacedaemonian. Xenoph
Hist. Graec. lib. i. cap. 3. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
* Watteville’s Hist. of the Helvetic Confederacy, vol. i. p. 126.
† In the year 1743.
46. Gaius Marius, 157–86 b.c., Roman general and politician, famously cruel and
rapacious.
47. Attila, 405–53, last and most powerful king of the Huns (r. 445–53), notorious
for his barbarity.


chapter viii
565
quit him, and assist that wounded enemy. If men in exalted stations did
but conceive how great a degree of affection and respect attends such
actions, they would study to imitate them, even when not prompted to
the practice by native elevation of sentiment. At present the European
nations generally carry on their wars with great moderation and gener-
osity. These dispositions have given rise to several customs which are
highly commendable, and frequently carried to the extreme of polite-
ness.* Sometimes refreshments are sent to the governor of a besieged
town; and it is usual to avoid ﬁring ontheking’sorthegeneral’squarters.
We are sure to gain by this moderation when we have to do with a gen-
erous enemy; but we are not bound to observe it any farther than can
be done without injuring the cause we defend; and it is clear that a pru-
dent general will, in this respect, regulate his conduct by the circum-
stances of the case, by an attention to the safety of the army and of the
state, by the magnitude of the danger, and by the character and behav-
iour of the enemy. Should a weak nation or townbeattackedbyafurious
conqueror who threatens to destroy it, are the defenders to forbear ﬁring
on his quarters? Far from it: that is the very place to which, if possible,
every shot should be directed.
Formerly, he who killed the king or general of the enemy was com-
mended, and greatly rewarded: the honours annexed to the spolia opima
are well known. Nothing was more natural: in former times, the bellig-
erent nations had, almost in every instance, their safety and very exis-
tence at stake; and the death of the leader often put an end to the war.
In our days, a soldier would not dare to boast of having killed the en-
* Timur-bec made war on Joseph Sofy, king of Carezem, and subdued his king-
dom. During the course of the war, that great man proved himself to be possessed
of all that moderation and politeness which is thought peculiar to our modern war-
riors. Some melons being brought to him whilst he was besieging Joseph in the city
of Eskiskus, he resolved to send a part of them to his enemy, thinking it would be a
breach of civility not to share those new fruits with that prince, when so near him;
and accordingly he ordered them to be put into a gold bason, and carried to him.
The king of Carezem received this instance of politeness in a brutal manner: he or-
dered the melons to be thrown into the fosse´, and gave the bason to the city gate-
keeper. La Croix, Hist. of Timur-bec, book v. ch. 27. [[Note added in 1773/1797
editions.]]
§159. Tender-
ness for the
person of a
king who
is in arms
against us.


566
book iii: of war
emy’s king. Thus sovereigns tacitly agree to secure their own persons. It
must be owned, that, in a war which is carried on with no great ani-
mosity, and where the safety and existence of the state are not involved
in the issue, this regard for regal majesty is perfectly commendable, and
even consonant to the reciprocal duties of nations. In such a war, to take
away the lifeof theenemy’ssovereignwhenitmightbespared,isperhaps
doing that nation a greater degree of harm than is necessary for bringing
the contest to a happy issue. But it is not one of the laws of war that we
should on every occasion spare the person of the hostile king: <364> we
are not bound to observe that moderation except where we have a fair
opportunity of making him prisoner.*
chapter ix
Of the Right of War, with regard to Things
belonging to the Enemy.
A state taking up arms in a just cause has a double right against her
enemy,—1. a right to obtain possession of her property with-held by the
enemy; to which must be added the expenses incurred in the pursuit of
that object, the charges of the war, and the reparation of damages: for,
were she obliged to bear those expenses and losses, she would not fully
recover her property, or obtain her due. 2. She has a right to weaken her
enemy, in order to render him incapable of supporting his unjust vio-
* On this subject, let us notice a trait of Charles XII. of Sweden [[r. 1697–1718]],
in which sound reason and the most exalted courage are equally conspicuous. That
prince being engaged in the siege of ThorninPoland[[1703]],andfrequentlywalking
round the city, was easily distinguished by the cannoneers, who regularly ﬁred upon
him as soon as they saw him make his appearance. The principal ofﬁcers of his army,
greatly alarmed at their sovereign’s danger, wished to have information sent to the
governor, that, if the practice was continued, no quarter should be granted either to
him or to the garrison. But the Swedish monarch would never permit such a step to
be taken,—telling his ofﬁcers that the governor and the Saxon cannoneers were per-
fectly right in acting as they did,—that it was himself who made the attack upon
them,—and that the war would be at an end if they could kill him; whereas they
would reap very little advantage even from killing the principal ofﬁcers of his army.
[[Jacques Lacombe]] Histoire du Nord, p. 26. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§160. Princi-
ples of the
right over
things be-
longing to
the enemy.


§11. and
between
nations.


preliminaries
73
society, in every thing that concerns their common welfare,—it thence-
forward belongs to that body, that state, and its rulers, to fulﬁl the duties
of humanity <lxi> towards strangers, in every thing that no longer de-
pends on the liberty of individuals; and it is the state more particularly
that is to perform those duties towards other states. We have alreadyseen
(§5) that men united in society remainsubjecttotheobligationsimposed
upon them by human nature. That society, consideredasamoralperson,
since possessed of an understanding, volition, and strength peculiar to
itself, is therefore obliged to live on the same terms with other societies
or states, as individual man was obliged, before those establishments, to
live with other men, that is to say, according to the laws of the natural
society established among the human race, with the difference only of
such exceptions as may arise from the different nature of the subjects.
Since the object of the natural society established between all man-
kind is that they should lend each other mutual assistance in order to
attain perfection themselves and to render their condition as perfect as
possible,—and since nations, considered as so many free persons living
together in a state of nature, are bound to cultivate human society with
each other,—the object of the great society established by nature be-
tween all nations is also the interchange of mutual assistance for their
own improvement and that of their condition.
The ﬁrst general law that we discover in the very object of the society
of nations, is that each individual nation is bound to contribute every
thing in her power to the happiness and perfection of all the others.*
But the duties that we owe to ourselves being unquestionably para-
mount to those we owe to others,—a nation owes herself in the ﬁrst
instance, and in preference to all other nations, to do every thing she can
to promote her own happiness and perfection. (I say every thingshecan,
not only in a physical but in a moral sense,—that is, every thing that she
* Xenophon points out the true reason of this ﬁrst of all duties, and establishes
its necessity,in the following words.“If weseeamanwhoisuniformlyeagertopursue
his own private advantage, without regard to the rules of honour or the duties of
friendship, why should we in any emergency think of sparing him?” [[Note added
in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§12. The
object of this
society of
nations.
§13. General
obligation
imposed by it.
§14. Explana-
tion of this
observation.


74
preliminaries
can do lawfully, and consistently with justice and honour.) When there-
fore she cannot contribute to the welfare of another nation without do-
ing an es-<lxii>sential injury to herself, her obligation ceases on that
particular occasion, and she is considered as lying under disability to
perform the ofﬁce in question.
Nations being free and independent of each other, in the same man-
ner as men are naturally free and independent, the second general law
of their society is, that each nation should be left in the peaceable en-
joyment of that liberty which she inherits from nature. The natural so-
ciety of nations cannot subsist, unless the natural rights of each be duly
respected. No nation is willing to renounce her liberty: she will rather
break off all commerce with those states that should attempt to infringe
upon it.
As a consequence of that liberty and independence, it exclusively be-
longs to each nation to form her own judgment of what her conscience
prescribes to her,—of what she can or cannot do,—of what it is proper
orimproper for hertodo:andof courseitrestssolelywithhertoexamine
and determine whether she can perform any ofﬁce for another nation
without neglecting the duty which she owes to herself. In all cases,there-
fore, in which a nation has the right of judging what her duty requires,
no other nation can compel her to act in such or such particularmanner:
for any attempt at such compulsion would be an infringement on the
liberty of nations.Wehavenorighttouseconstraintagainstafreeperson
except in those cases where such person is bound to perform some par-
ticular thing for us, and for some particular reason which does not de-
pend on his judgment,—in those cases, in short, where we have a perfect
right against him.
In order perfectly to understand this, it is necessary to observe, that
the obligation, and the right which corresponds to or is derived from it,
are distinguished into external and internal. The obligation is internal,
as it binds the conscience, and is deduced from the rules of our duty: it
is external, as it is considered relatively to other men, and producessome
right between them. The internal obligation is always the same in its
nature, though it varies in degree: but the external obligation is divided
into perfect and imperfect; and the right that results from it is also perfect
§15. The
second general
law is the
liberty and
independence
of nations.
§16. Effect of
that liberty.
§17. Distinc-
tions between
internal and
external,
perfect and
imperfect obli-
gations and
rights.

preliminaries
75
or imperfect. The perfect right is that which is accompanied by the right
of compelling those who refuse to fulﬁl the correspondent obligation;
the imperfect right is unaccompanied by that right of compulsion. The
<lxiii> perfect obligation isthatwhichgivestotheoppositepartytheright
of compulsion; the imperfect gives him only a right to ask.
It is now easy to conceive why the right is always imperfect, when the
correspondent obligation depends on the judgment of the party in
whose breast it exists: for if, in such a case, we had a right to compel him,
he would no longer enjoy the freedom of determination respecting the
conduct he is to pursue in order to obey the dictates of his own con-
science. Our obligation is always imperfect with respect to other people,
while we possess the liberty of judging how we are to act: and we retain
that liberty on all occasions where we ought to be free.
Since men are naturally equal, and a perfect equality prevails in their
rights and obligations, as equally proceeding from nature,—nations
composed of men, and considered as so many free persons living to-
gether in the state of nature, are naturally equal, and inherit fromnature
the same obligations and rights. Power or weakness does not in this re-
spect produce any difference. A dwarf is as much a man as a giant; a
small republic is no less a sovereign state than the most powerful
kingdom.
By a necessary consequence of that equality, whatever is lawful for
one nation, is equally lawful for any other; and whatever is unjustiﬁable
in the one, is equally so in the other.
A nation then is mistress of her own actions so long as they do not
affect the proper and perfect rights of any other nation,—so long as she
is only internally bound, and does not lie under any external and perfect
obligation. If she makes an ill use of her liberty, she is guilty of a breach
of duty; but other nations are bound to acquiesce in her conduct, since
they have no right to dictate to her.
Since nations are free, independent, and equal,—and since each pos-
sesses the right of judging, according to the dictates of her conscience,
what conduct she is to pursue in order to fulﬁl her duties,—the effect
of the whole is, to produce, at least externally and in the eyes of man-
kind, a perfect equality of rights between nations, in the administration
§18. Equality
of nations.
§19. Effect of
that equality.
§20. Each
nation is
mistress of her
own actions
when they do
not affect the
perfect rights
of others.
§21. Founda-
tion of the
voluntary law
of nations.


76
preliminaries
of their affairs and the pursuit of their pretensions, without regard to
the intrinsic justice of their conduct, of which others have no right to
form a deﬁnitive judgment; so that whatever may be done by any one
nation, may be <lxiv> done by any other; and they ought, in human
society, to be considered as possessing equal rights.
Each nation in fact maintains that she has justice on her side in every
dispute that happens to arise: and it does not belong to either of the
parties interested, or to other nations, to pronounce a judgment on the
contested question. The party who is in the wrong is guilty of a crime
against her own conscience: but as there exists a possibility that she may
perhaps have justice on her side, we cannot accuse her of violating the
laws of society.
It is therefore necessary, on many occasions, thatnationsshouldsuffer
certain things to be done, though in their own nature unjust and con-
demnable; because they cannot oppose them by open force, without vi-
olating the liberty of some particular state, and destroying the founda-
tions of their natural society. And since they are bound to cultivate that
society, it is of course presumed that all nations have consented to the
principle we have just established. The rules that are deduced from it,
constitute what Monsieur Wolf calls “the voluntarylawof nations”;and
there is no reason why we should not use the same term, although we
thought it necessary to deviate from that great man in our manner of
establishing the foundation of that law.
The laws of natural society are of such importance to the safety of
all states, that, if the custom once prevailed of trampling them under
foot, no nation could ﬂatter herself with the hope of preserving her na-
tional existence, and enjoying domestic tranquillity, however attentive
to pursue every measure dictated by the most consummate prudence,
justice, and moderation.* Now all men and all states have a perfect right
to those things that are necessary for their preservation, since that right
* Etenim si haec perturbare omnia et permiscere volumus, totam vitam pericu-
losam, insidiosam, infestamque reddemus. Cicero in Verr. ii. 15. [[“The fact is that
if we are prepared to reduce all these principles to chaos and confusion, we shall ﬁll
life with danger and resentment and hostility at every turn.” In Verrem.]]
§22. Right of
nations against
the infractors
of the law of
nations.


preliminaries
77
corresponds to an indispensable obligation. All nations have therefore a
right to resort to forcible means for the purpose of repressing any one
particular nation who openly violates the laws of the society which na-
ture has established between them, or who directly attacks the welfare
and safety of that society.
But care must be taken not to extend that right to the <lxv>prejudice
of the liberty of nations. They are all free and independent, but bound
to observe the laws of that society which nature has established between
them; and so far bound, that, when any one of them violates those laws,
the others have a right to repress her. The conduct of each nation, there-
fore, is no farther subject to the controul of the others, than as the in-
terests of natural society are concerned. The general and common right
of nations over the conduct of any sovereign state is onlycommensurate
to the object of that society which exists between them.
The several engagements into which nations may enter, produce a
new kind of law of nations, called conventional, or of treaties. As it is
evident that a treaty binds none but the contracting parties, the con-
ventional law of nations is not a universal but a particular law. All that
can be done on this subject in a treatise on the law of nations, is to lay
down those general rules which nations are bound to observe with re-
spect to their treaties. A minute detail of the various agreements made
between particular nations, and of the rights and obligations thence re-
sulting, is matter of fact, and belongs to the province of history.
Certain maxims and customs consecrated by long use, and observed
by nations in their mutual intercourse with each other as a kind of law,
form the customary law of nations, or the custom of nations. This law is
founded on a tacit consent, or, if you please, on a tacit convention of
the nations that observe it towards each other. Whence it appears that
it is not obligatory except on those nations who have adopted it, and
that it is not universal, any more than the conventional law. The same
remark, therefore, is equally applicable to this customary law, viz. that a
minute detail of its particulars does not belong to a systematic treatise
on the law of nations, but that we must content ourselves with giving a
general theory of it,—that is to say, the rules which are to be observed
in it, as well with a view to its effects, as to its substance: and,withrespect
§23. Measure
of that right.
§24. Conven-
tional law of
nations, or law
of treaties.
§25.
Customary law
of nations.


78
preliminaries
to the latter, those rules will serve to distinguish lawful and innocent
customs from those that are unjust and unlawful.
When a custom or usage is generally established, either between all
the civilised nations in the world, or only between those of a certain
continent, as of Europe, for example, or between those who have a more
frequentintercoursewitheachother,—if thatcustomisinitsownnature
in-<lxvi>different, and much more, if it be useful and reasonable, it
becomes obligatory on all the nations in question, who are considered
as having given their consent to it, and are bound to observe it towards
each other, as long as they have not expressly declared their resolution
of not observing it in future. But if that custom contains any thing un-
just or unlawful, it is not obligatory: on the contrary, every nation is
bound to relinquish it, since nothing can oblige or authorise her to vi-
olate the law of nature.
These three kinds of law of nations, the voluntary, the conventional,
and the customary, together constitute the positive law of nations. For
they all proceed from the will of nations,—the voluntary from theirpre-
sumed consent, the conventional from an express consent, and the cus-
tomary from tacit consent: and as there can be no other mode of de-
ducing any law from the will of nations, there are only these three kinds
of positive law of nations.
We shall be careful to distinguish them from the natural or necessary
law of nations, without, however, treating of them separately. But after
having, under each individual head of our subject, established what the
necessary law prescribes, we shall immediately add how and why the
decisions of that law must be modiﬁed by the voluntary law; or (which
amounts to the same thing in other terms) we shall explain how, in con-
sequence of the liberty of nations, and pursuant to the rules of their
natural society, the external law, which they are to observe towards each
other, differs in certain instances from the maxims of the internal law,
which nevertheless remain always obligatory in point of conscience. As
to the rights introduced by treaties or by custom, there is no room to
apprehend that any one will confound them with the natural law of
nations. They form that species of law of nations which authors have
distinguished by the name of arbitrary.
§26. General
rule respecting
that law.
§27. Positive
law of nations.


preliminaries
79
To furnish the reader beforehand with a general direction respecting
the distinction between the necessary and the voluntary law, let us here
observe, that, as the necessary law is always obligatory on the conscience,
a nation ought never to lose sight of it in deliberating on the line of
conduct she is to pursue in order to fulﬁl her duty: but when there is
question of examining what she may demand of other states, she must
consult the voluntary law, whose maxims are devoted to the safety and
advantage of the universal society of mankind. <1>
§28. General
maxim res-
pecting the use
of the neces-
sary and the
voluntary law.




81
the
LAW
of
NATIONS
u
b o o k i
u
chapter ix
567
lence (§138)—a right to deprive him of the means of resistance. Hence,
as from theirsource,originatealltherightswhichwargivesusoverthings
belonging to the enemy. I speak of ordinary cases, and of what particu-
larly relates to the enemy’s property. On certain occasions, the right of
punishing him produces new rights over thethingswhichbelongtohim,
as it also does over his person. These we shall presently consider.
We have a right to deprive our enemy of his possessions, of every
thing which may augment his strength andenablehimtomakewar.This
every one endeavours to accomplish in the manner most suitabletohim.
Whenever we have an opportunity, we seize on the enemy’s property,
and convert it to our own use: and thus, besides diminishingtheenemy’s
power,weaugmentourown,andobtainatleastapartialindemniﬁcation
or equivalent, either for what constitutes the subject of the war, or for
the expenses and losses incurred in its prosecution:—in a word, we do
ourselves justice.
The right to security often authorises us to punish injustice or vio-
lence. It is an additional plea for depriving an enemy of <365> somepart
of his possessions. This manner of chastising a nation is more humane
than making the penalty to fall on the persons of the citizens. With that
view, things of value may be taken from her, such as rights, cities, prov-
inces. But all wars do not afford just grounds for inﬂicting punishment.
A nation that has with upright intentions supported a bad cause, and
observed moderation in the prosecution of it, is entitled rather to com-
passion than resentment from a generous conqueror: and in a doubtful
cause we are to suppose that the enemy sincerely thinks himself in the
right (Prelim. §21; Book III. §40). The only circumstance, therefore,
which gives an enemy the right to punish his adversaries, is their evident
injustice unsupported even by any plausible pretext, or some heinous
outrage in their proceedings: and, on every occasion, heoughttoconﬁne
the punishment to what his own security and the safety of nations re-
quire. As far as consistent with prudence, it is glorious to obey the voice
of clemency: that amiable virtue seldom fails of being more useful to
the party who exerts it, than inﬂexible rigor. The clemency of Henrythe
Great48 was of singular advantage in co-operating with his valour, when
48. Henry IV of France, r. 1589–1610.
§161. The
right of seizing
on them.
§162. What is
taken from the
enemy by way
of penalty.


568
book iii: of war
that good prince found himself compelled toconquerhisownkingdom.
Those who would have continued his enemies if only subdued by arms,
were won by his goodness, and became affectionate subjects.
In ﬁne, we seize on the enemy’s property, his towns, his provinces, in
order to bring him to reasonable conditions, and compel him to accept
of an equitable and solid peace. Thus, much more is taken from him
than he owes, more than is claimed of him: but this is done with adesign
of restoring the surplus by a treaty of peace. The king of France was, in
the last war, known to declare that he aimed at nothing for himself: and
by the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle49 he actually restored all his conquests.*
As the towns and lands taken from the enemy are called conquests, all
movable property taken from him comes under the denomination of
booty. This booty naturally belongs to the sovereign making war, no less
than the conquests; for he alone has such claims against the hostile na-
tion, as warrant him to seize on her property and convert it to his own
use. His soldiers, and even his auxiliaries, are only instruments which he
employs in asserting his right. He maintains and pays them. Whatever
they do is in his name, and for him. Thus there is no difﬁculty, evenwith
regard to the auxiliaries. If they are not associates in the war, it is not
carried on for their beneﬁt; and they have no more right to the booty
than to the conquests. But the sovereign may grant the troopswhatshare
of the booty he pleases. At present most nations allow them whatever
they can make on certain occasions when the general allows of plun-
dering,—such <366> as the spoil of enemies fallen in the ﬁeld of battle,
the pillage of a camp which has been forced, and sometimes that of a
town taken by assault. In severalservices,thesoldierhasalsotheproperty
of what he can take from the enemy’s troops when he is out on a party
or in a detachment, excepting artillery, military stores, magazines and
convoys of provision and forage, which are applied to the wants and use
* The peace was become absolutely necessary to him; and he had, in return for
his few conquests, Louisbourg, with all its dependencies, which were of more im-
portance to him. [Note by the former translator.] [[The bracketed note by the 1797
editor refers to the note on p. 543 of the Dublin edition (1787) of The Law of
Nations.]]
49. Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, 1748.
§163. What is
with-held from
him, in order
to oblige him
to give just
satisfaction.
§164. Booty.


chapter ix
569
of the army. This custom being once admitted in an army, it would be
injustice to exclude the auxiliaries from the right allowed to the national
troops. Among the Romans, the soldier was obliged to bring in to the
public stock all the booty he had taken. This the general caused to be
sold; and after distributing a part of the produce among the soldiers,
according to rank, he consigned the residue to the public treasury.
Instead of the custom of pillaging the open country and defenceless
places, another mode has been substituted, which is at once more hu-
mane, and more advantageous to the belligerent sovereign—Imeanthat
of contributions. Whoever carries on a just war has a right to make the
enemy’s country contribute to the support of his army, and towards de-
fraying all the charges of the war. Thus he obtains a part of what is due
to him; and the enemy’s subjects, by consenting to pay the sum de-
manded, have their property secured from pillage, and the country is
preserved. But a general who wishes to enjoy an unsullied reputation,
must be moderate in his demand of contributions, andproportionthem
to the abilities of those on whom they are imposed. An excess in this
point does not escape the reproach of cruelty and inhumanity:although
there is not so great an appearance of ferocity in it as in ravage and de-
struction, it displays a greater degree of avarice or greediness. Instances
of humanity and moderation cannot be too often quoted. A very com-
mendable one occurred during those long wars which France carried on
in the reign of Louis XIV. The sovereigns seeing it was their mutual in-
terest as well as duty to prevent ravage, made it a practice, on the com-
mencement of hostilities, to enter into treaties for regulating the con-
tributions on a supportable footing: they determined the extent of
hostile territory in which each might demandcontributions,theamount
of them, and the manner in which the parties sent to levy them were to
behave. In these treaties it was expressed, that no body of men under a
certain number should advance into the enemy’s country beyond the
limits agreed on, under the penalty of being treated as free-booters. By
such steps they prevented a multitude of disorders and enormities,
which entail ruin on the people, and generally without the least advan-
tage to the belligerent sovereigns. Whence comes it that so noble an ex-
ample is not universally imitated?
§165.
Contributions.

570
book iii: of war
If it is lawful to take away the property of an unjust enemy in order
to weaken or punish him (§§161, 162), the same motives justify us in
destroying what we cannot conveniently carry away. Thus, we waste a
country, and destroy the provisions <367> and forage, that the enemy
may not ﬁnd a subsistence there: we sink his ships when we cannot take
them or bring them off. All this tends to promote the main object of
the war: but such measures are only to be pursued with moderation,and
according to the exigency of the case. Those who tear up the vines and
cut down the fruit-trees, are looked upon as savage barbarians, unless
when they do it with a view to punish the enemy for some grossviolation
of the law of nations. They desolate a country for many years to come,
and beyond what their own safety requires. Such a conduct is not dic-
tated by prudence, but by hatred and fury.
On certain occasions, however, matters are carried still farther: a
country is totally ravaged, towns and villages are sacked, and delivered
up a prey to ﬁre and sword. Dreadful extremities, even when we are
forced into them! Savage and monstrous excesses, when committed
without necessity! There are two reasons, however, which may authorise
them,—1. the necessity of chastising an unjust and barbarous nation,of
checking her brutality, and preserving ourselves from her depredations.
Who can doubt that the king of Spain and the powers of Italy have a
very good right utterly to destroy those maritime towns of Africa, those
nests of pirates, that are continually molesting their commerce and ru-
ining their subjects? But what nation will proceed to such extremities,
merely for the sake of punishing the hostile sovereign? Itis butindirectly
that he will feel the punishment: and how great the cruelty, to ruin an
innocent people in order to reach him! The same prince whose ﬁrmness
and just resentment was commended in the bombardment of Algiers,
was, after that of Genoa, accused of pride and inhumanity.50 2. We rav-
age a country and render it un-inhabitable, in order to make it serve us
as a barrier, and to cover our frontier against an enemy whose incursions
50. The prince in question is Louis XIV of France. The bombardment of Algiers,
undertaken to effect deliverance of the Christian captives, occurred in 1682–83; the
bombardment of Genoa in 1684.
§166. Waste
and destruc-
tion.
§167.
Ravaging and
burning.
chapter ix
571
we are unable to check by any other means. A cruel expedient, it is true:
but why should we not be allowed to adopt it at the expense of the
enemy, since, with the same view, we readily submit to lay waste ourown
provinces? The czar Peter the Great,51 in his ﬂight before the formidable
Charles the Twelfth,52 ravaged an extent of above fourscore leagues of
his own empire, in order to check the impetuosity of a torrent which he
was unable to withstand. Thus the Swedes were worn down with want
and fatigue; and the Russian monarch reaped at Pultowa53 the fruits of
his circumspection and sacriﬁces. But violent remedies are to be spar-
ingly applied: there must be reasons of suitable importance to justifythe
use of them. A prince who should without necessity imitate the czar’s
conduct, would be guilty of a crime against his people: and he who does
the like in an enemy’s country when impelled to it by no necessity or
induced by feeble reasons, becomes the scourge of mankind. In the last
century, the French ravaged and burntthe Palatinate.*<368>AllEurope
resounded with invectives against such a mode of waging war. It was in
vain that the court attempted to palliate their conduct, by alleging that
this was done only with a view to cover their own frontier:—that was
an end to which the ravaging of the Palatinate contributed but little:
and the whole proceeding exhibited nothing to the eyes of mankind but
the revenge and cruelty of a haughty and unfeeling minister.
For whatever cause a country is ravaged, we ought to spare those ed-
iﬁces which do honour to human society, and do not contribute to in-
crease the enemy’s strength,—such as temples, tombs, public buildings,
and all works of remarkable beauty. What advantage is obtained by de-
stroying them? It is declaring one’s self an enemy to mankind, thuswan-
tonly to deprive them of these monuments of art and models of taste;
and in that light Belisarius represented the matter to Tottila, king of the
* In 1674, and a second time, much more dreadfully, in 1689.
51. Peter the Great, czar of Russia, r. 1682–1725.
52. In 1697–1718, during the Great Northern War.
53. In 1709 Peter the Great decisively defeated the forces of King Charles XII of
Sweden at Poltava. The Russian victory became a contributing factor in the destruc-
tion of Sweden’s empire during the Great Northern War.
§168. What
things are to
be spared.


572
book iii: of war
Goths.* We still detest those barbarians who destroyed so manywonders
of art, when they over-ran the Roman empire. However just the re-
sentment with which the great Gustavus was animated against Maxi-
milian duke of Bavaria, he rejected with indignation the advice of those
who wished him to demolish the stately palace of Munich,54 and took
particular care to preserve that admirable structure.
Nevertheless, if we ﬁnd it necessary to destroy ediﬁces of that nature
in order to carry on the operations of war or to advance the works in a
siege, we have an undoubted right to take such a step. The sovereign of
the country, or his general, makes no scruple to destroy them, when
necessity or the maxims of war require it. The governor of a besieged
town sets ﬁre to the suburbs, that they may not afford a lodgement to
the besiegers. Nobody presumes to blame a general who lays waste gar-
dens, vineyards, or orchards, for the purpose of encamping on the
ground, and throwing up an intrenchment. If any beautiful production
of art be thereby destroyed, it is an accident, an unhappy consequence
of the war; and the general will not be blamed, except in those cases
when he might have pitched his camp elsewhere without the smallest
inconvenience to himself.
In bombarding towns, it is difﬁcult to spare the ﬁnest ediﬁces. At
present we generally content ourselves with battering the ramparts and
defences of a place. To destroy a town with bombs and red-hot balls, is
an extremity to which we do not proceed without cogent reasons. But
it is nevertheless warranted by the laws of war, when we are unable by
any other mode to reduce an important post, on which the success of
the war may depend, or which enables the enemy to annoy us in a dan-
gerous manner. It is also sometimes practised when we have no other
means of forcing an enemy to make war with humanity, or punishing
him for some instance of outrageous conduct. But it is only in cases of
the last extremity, and with reluctance, that <369> good princes exert a
* See his letter in Procopius. It is quoted by Grotius, lib. iii. cap. 12, §2, not. 11
[[Law of War and Peace]].
54. Gustavus Adolphus had invaded Bavaria in 1632 and occupied Munich. He
considered Maximilian I, elector of Bavaria, a Machiavellian supporter of his enemy
Emperor Ferdinand II.
§169.
Bombarding
towns.


chapter ix
573
right of so rigorous a nature. In the year 1694, the English bombarded
several maritime towns of France, on account of the great injury done
to the British trade by their privateers. But the virtuous and noble-
minded consort of William the Third did not receive the news of these
exploits with real satisfaction. She expressed a sensible concern that war
should render such acts of hostility necessary,—adding, that she hoped
such operations would be viewed in so odious a light, as to induce both
parties to desist from them in future.*
Fortresses, ramparts, and every kind of fortiﬁcation, are solely ap-
propriated to the purposes of war: and in a just war, nothing is more
natural, nothing more justiﬁable, than to demolish those which we do
not intend to retain in our own possession. We so far weaken the enemy,
and do not involve an innocent multitude in the losses which we cause
him. This was the grand advantagethatFrancederivedfromhervictories
in a war in which she did not aim at making conquests.55
Safe-guards are granted to lands and houses intended to be spared,
whether from pure favour, or with the proviso of a contribution. These
consist of soldiers who protect them against parties, by producing the
general’s orders. The persons of these soldiers must be considered by the
enemy as sacred: he cannot commit any hostilities against them, since
they have taken their station there as benefactors, and for the safety of
his subjects. They are to be respected in the same manner as an escort
appointed to a garrison, or to prisoners of war, on their return to their
own country.
What we have advanced is sufﬁcient to give an idea of themoderation
which we ought to observe, even in the most just war, in exerting our
right to pillage and ravage the enemy’s country. Except the single case
in which there is question of punishing an enemy, the whole is reducible
to this general rule—All damage done to the enemy unnecessarily, every
act of hostility which does not tend to procure victory and bring the war
to a conclusion, is a licentiousness condemned by the law of nature.
* [[Nicolas Chevalier,]] Histoire de Guillaume III. liv. vi. tom. 2. p. 66.
55. War of the Austrian Succession.
§170. Demo-
lition of
fortresses.
§171.
Safeguards.
§172. General
rule of modera-
tion, respecting
the evil which
may be done
to an enemy.


574
book iii: of war
But this licentiousness is unavoidably suffered to pass with impunity,
and, to a certain degree, tolerated, betweennationandnation.Howthen
shall we, in particular cases, determine with precision, to what lengths
it was necessary to carry hostilities in order to bring the war to a happy
conclusion? And even if the point could be exactly ascertained, nations
acknowledge no common judge: each forms her own judgment of the
conduct she is to pursue in fulﬁlling her duties. If you once open a door
forcontinualaccusationsof outrageousexcessinhostilities,youwillonly
augment the number of complaints, and inﬂame the minds of the con-
tending parties with increasing animosity: fresh injuries will be perpet-
ually springing up; and the sword will never be sheathed till one of the
parties be utterly destroyed. The whole, therefore, <370> should, be-
tween nation and nation, be conﬁned to general rules, independent of
circumstances, and sure and easy in the application. Now the rules can-
not answer this description, unless they teach us to view things in an
absolute sense,—to consider them in themselves and in their own na-
ture. As, therefore, with respect to hostilities against the enemy’sperson,
the voluntary law of nations only prohibits those measures which are in
themselves unlawful and odious, such as poisoning, assassination,
treachery, the massacre of an enemy who has surrendered, and from
whom we have nothing to fear,—so the same law, in the question now
before us, condemns every act of hostility which, of its own nature, and
independently of circumstances, contributes nothing to the success of
our arms, and does not increase our strength, or weaken that of the en-
emy: and, on the other hand, it permits or tolerates every act which in
itself is naturally adapted to promote the object of the war, without
considering whether such act of hostility was unnecessary, useless, or
superﬂuous, in that particular instance, unless there be the clearest evi-
dence to prove that an exception ought to have been made in the case
in question: for where there is positive evidence, the freedom of judg-
ment no longer exists. Hence, the pillaging of a country, or ravaging it
with ﬁre, is not, in a general view of the matter, a violation of the laws
of war: but if an enemy of much superior strength treats in this manner
a town or province which he might easily keep in his possession as a
means of obtaining an equitable and advantageous peace, he is univer-
§173. Rule of
the voluntary
law of nations
on the same
subject.


chapter x
575
sally accused of making war like a furious barbarian. Thus the wanton
destruction of public monuments, temples, tombs, statues, paintings,
&c. is absolutely condemned, even by the voluntary law of nations, as
never being conducive to the lawful object of war. The pillage and de-
structionof towns,thedevastationof theopencountry,ravaging,setting
ﬁre to houses, are measures no less odious and detestable on every oc-
casion when they are evidently put in practice withoutabsolutenecessity
or at least very cogent reasons. But as the perpetratorsof suchoutrageous
deeds might attempt to palliate them under pretext of deservedly pun-
ishing the enemy,—be it here observed, that the natural and voluntary
law of nations does not allow us to inﬂict such punishments, except for
enormous offences against the law of nations: and even then, it is glo-
rious to listen to the voice of humanity and clemency, when rigour is
not absolutely necessary. Cicero condemns the conduct of his country-
men in destroying Corinth to avenge the unworthy treatment offeredto
the Roman embassadors, because Rome was able to assert the dignity of
her ministers, without proceeding to such extreme rigour. <371>
chapter x
Of Faith between Enemies,—of Stratagems, Artiﬁces
in War, Spies, and some other Practices.
The faith of promises and treaties is the basis of the peace of nations,
as we have shewn in an express chapter (Book II. Ch. XV.). It is sacred
among men, and absolutely essential to their common safety. Are we
then dispensed from it towards an enemy? To imagine that between two
nations at war every duty ceases, every tie of humanity is broken, would
be an error equally gross and destructive. Men, although reduced to the
necessity of taking up arms for their own defence and in supportof their
rights, do not therefore cease to be men. They are still subject to the
same laws of nature:—otherwise there would be no laws of war. Even
he who wages an unjust war against us is still a man: we still owe him
whatever that quality requires of us. But a conﬂict arises between our
§174. Faith to
be sacred be-
tween enemies.

576
book iii: of war
duties towards ourselves, and those which connect us with other men.
The right to security authorises us to put in practice, against this unjust
enemy, every thing necessary for repelling him, or bringing him to rea-
son. But all those duties, the exercise of which is not necessarily sus-
pended by this conﬂict, subsist in their full force: they are still obligatory
on us, both with respect to the enemy and to all the rest of mankind.
Now, the obligation of keeping faith is so far from ceasing in time of
war by virtue of the preference which the duties towards ourselves are
entitled to, that it then becomes more necessary than ever. There are a
thousand occasions, even in the course of the war, when, in order to
check its rage, and alleviate the calamities which follow in its train, the
mutual interest and safety of both the contending parties requires that
they should agree on certain points. What would become of prisoners
of war, capitulating garrisons, and towns that surrender, if the word of
an enemy were not to be relied on? War would degenerate into an un-
bridled and cruel licentiousness: its evils would be restrained by no
bounds; and how could we ever bring it to a conclusion, and re-establish
peace? If faith be banished from among enemies, a war can never be
terminated with any degree of safety, otherwise than by the total de-
struction of one of the parties. The slightest difference, theleastquarrel,
would produce a war similar to that of Hannibal against the Romans,
in which the parties fought, not for this or that province, not for sov-
ereignty or for glory, but for the very existence of their respective na-
tions.* Thus it is certain that the <372> faith of promises and treaties is
to be held sacred in war as well as in peace, between enemies as well as
between friends.
The conventions, the treaties made with a nation, are broken or an-
nulled by a war arising between the contracting parties, either because
those compacts are grounded on a tacit supposition of the continuance
of peace, or because each of the parties, being authorised to deprive his
enemy of what belongs to him, takes from him those rights which he
had conferred on him by treaty. Yet here we must except those treaties
by which certain things are stipulated in case of a rupture,—as, for in-
* De salute certatum est. [[“The ﬁght was for survival.”]]
§175. What
treaties are to
be observed be-
tween enemies.


chapter x
577
stance, the length of time to be allowed on each side for the subjects of
the other nation to quit the country,—the neutrality of a town or prov-
ince, insured by mutual consent, &c. Since, by treaties of this nature,
we mean to provide for what shall be observed in case of a rupture, we
renounce the right of cancelling them by a declaration of war.
For the same reason, all promises made to an enemy in the course of
a war are obligatory. For when once we treat with him whilst the sword
is unsheathed, we tacitly but necessarily renounce all power of breaking
the compact by way of compensation or on account of the war, as we
cancel antecedent treaties: otherwise it would be doing nothing, and
there would be an absurdity in treating with the enemy at all.
But conventions made during a war are like all other compacts and
treaties, of which the reciprocal observance is a tacit condition(Book II.
§202): we are no longer bound to observe them towards an enemy who
has himself been the ﬁrst to violate them. And even where there is ques-
tion of two separate conventions which are wholly unconnected with
each other,—although we are never justiﬁable in using perﬁdy on the
plea of our having to do with an enemy who has broken his word on a
former occasion, we may nevertheless suspend the effect of a promise in
order to compel him to repair his breach of faith; and what we have
promised him may be detained by way of security, till he has given sat-
isfaction for his perﬁdy. Thus, at the taking of Namur in 1695, the king
of England caused marshal Boufﬂers56 to be put under arrest, and, not-
withstanding the capitulation, detained him prisoner, for the purpose
of obliging France to make reparation for the infractions of the capit-
ulations of Dixmude and Deinse.*
Good-faith consists not only in the observance of our promises, but
also in not deceiving on such occasions as lay us under any sort of ob-
ligation to speak the truth. From this subject arises a question which has
been warmly debated in former days, and which appeared not a little
intricate at a time when people did not entertain just or accurate ideas
respecting the nature of a lie. Several writers, and especiallydivines,have
* [[Chevalier]] Histoire de Guillaume III. tom. ii. p. 148.
56. Louis Franc¸ois, Duc de Boufﬂers, 1644–1711, marshal of France, 1692.
§176. On
what occasions
they may be
broken.
§177. Of lies.


578
book iii: of war
made truth a kind of deity, to which, for itsownsake,andindependently
of its consequences, we <373> owe a certain inviolable respect. They
have absolutely condemned every speech that is contrary to thespeaker’s
thoughts: they have pronounced it to be our duty, on every occasion
when we cannot be silent, to speak the truth according to the best of
our knowledge, and to sacriﬁce to their divinity our dearest interests,
rather than be deﬁcient in respect to her. But philosophers of more ac-
curate ideas and more profound penetrationhaveclearedupthatnotion,
so confused, and so false in its consequences. They have acknowledged
that truth in general is to be respected, as being the soul of human so-
ciety, the basis of all conﬁdence in the mutual intercourse of men,—
and, consequently, that a man ought not to speak an untruth, even in
mattersof indifference,lestheweakentherespectduetotruthingeneral,
and injure himself by rendering his veracity questionable even when he
speaks seriously. But in thus grounding the respect due to truth on its
effects, they took the right road, and soon found it easy to distinguish
between the occasions when we are obliged to speak the truth, or declare
our thoughts, and those when there exists no such obligation. The ap-
pellation of lies is given only to the words of a man who speaks contrary
to his thoughts, on occasions when he is under an obligation to speak
the truth. Another name (in Latin, falsiloquium)* is applied to any false
discourse to persons who have no right to insist on our telling them the
truth in the particular case in question.
These principles being laid down, it is not difﬁcult to ascertain the
lawful use of truth or falsehood towards an enemy on particular occa-
sions. Whenever we have expressly or tacitly engaged to speak truth, we
are indispensably obliged to it by that faith of which we have proved the
inviolability. Such is the case of conventions and treaties:—it is indis-
pensably necessary that they should imply a tacit engagement to speak
the truth: for it would be absurd to allege that we do not enter into any
obligation of not deceiving the enemy under colour of treating with
him:—it would be downright mockery,—it would be doing nothing.
We are also bound to speak the truth to an enemy on all occasions when
* Falsiloquy, false-speaking, untruth, falsehood.


chapter x
579
we are naturally obliged to it by the laws of humanity,—that is to say,
whenever the success of our arms, and the duties we owe to ourselves,
do not clash with the common duties of humanity, so as to suspendtheir
force in the present case, and dispense with our performance of them.
Thus, when we dismiss prisoners either on ransom or exchange,itwould
be infamous to point out the worst road for their march, or to put them
in a dangerous one: and should the hostile prince or general inquireafter
a woman or child who is dear to him, it would be scandalous to deceive
him.
But when, by leading the enemy into an error, either by words in
which we are not obliged to speak truth, or by some feint, we <374> can
gain an advantage in the war, which it would be lawful to seek by open
force, it cannot be doubted that such a proceeding is perfectlyjustiﬁable.
Nay, since humanity obliges us to prefer the gentlest methods in the
prosecution of our rights,—if, by a stratagem, by a feint void of perﬁdy,
we can make ourselves masters of a strong place, surprise the enemy,and
overcome him, it is much better, it is really more commendable, to suc-
ceed in this manner, than by a bloody siege or the carnage of a battle.*
But, the desire to spare the effusion of blood will by no means authorise
us to employ perﬁdy, the introduction of which would be attended with
consequences of too dreadful a nature, and would deprive sovereigns,
* There was a time when those who were taken in attempting to surprise a town
were put to death. In 1597, prince Maurice [[of Nassau, Prince of Orange (1618–25),
and capitain-general of the Dutch forces from 1587]] attempted to take Venloo by
surprise: the attempt failed; and some of his men being made prisoners on the oc-
casion, “were condemned to death,—the mutual consent of the parties having in-
troduced that new rule, in order to obviate dangers of this kind.” (Grotius Hist. of
the Disturb. in the Netherlands.) Since that time, the rule has been changed: at pres-
ent, military men who attempt to surprise a town in time of open war, are not, in
case of being taken, treated in a different manner from other prisoners: and this cus-
tom is more consonant to reason andhumanity.Nevertheless,if theywereindisguise,
or had employed treachery, they would be treated as spies: and this is perhaps what
Grotius means: for I do not, in any other instance, ﬁnd that such severity was used
towards troops who were simply come to surprise a town in the silence of the night.
It would be quite another affair, if such an attempt were made in a time of profound
peace; and the Savoyards who were taken in the escalade of Geneva, deserved the
punishment of death which was inﬂicted on them. [See page 508.] [[Note added in
1773/1797 editions.]]
§178. Strata-
gems and arti-
ﬁces in war.


580
book iii: of war
once embarked in war, of all means of treating together, or restoring
peace (§174).
Deceptions practised on an enemy either by words or actions, but
without perﬁdy,—snares laid for him consistent with the rights of
war,—are stratagems, the use of which has always been acknowledged
as lawful, and had often a great share in the glory of celebrated com-
manders. The king of England, William III, having discovered that one
of his secretaries regularly sent intelligence of every thing to the hostile
general, caused the traitor to be secretly put under arrest, and made him
write to the duke of Luxembourg, that the next day the allies would
make a general forage, supported by a large body of infantry with can-
non: and this artiﬁce he employed for the purpose of surprising the
French army at Steinkirk. But, through the activity of the French gen-
eral, and the courage of his troops, though the measures were so artfully
contrived, the success was not answerable.*
In the use of stratagems, we should respect not only the faith due to
an enemy, but also the rights of humanity, and carefully avoid doing
things the introduction of whichwouldbepernicioustomankind.Since
the commencement of hostilities between France and England,57 an
English frigate is said to have appeared off Calais, and made signals of
distress, with a view of decoying out some vessel, and actually seized a
boat and some sailors who generously came to her assistance. If thefact
be true, that unworthy stratagem deservesa severepunishment.Ittends
<375> to damp a benevolent charity which should be held so sacred in
the eyes of mankind, and which is so laudable even between enemies.
Besides, making signals of distress is asking assistance, and, bythatvery
action, promising perfect security to those who give the friendly suc-
cour. Therefore the action attributed to that frigate implies an odious
perﬁdy.
Some nations, even the Romans, for a long time professed to despise
every kind of artiﬁce, surprise, or stratagem, in war; and others went so
* [[Antoine de Pas]] Memoires de Feuquieres, tom. iii. p. 87.
57. May 15, 1756.


chapter x
581
far as to send notice of the time and place they had chosen for giving
battle.* In this conduct there was more generosity than prudence. Such
behaviour would indeed be very laudable, if, as in the frenzy of duels,
the only business was to display personal courage. But in war the object
is to defend our country, and by force to prosecute our rights which are
unjustly with-held from us: and the surest means of obtaining our end
are also the most commendable, provided they be not unlawful and odi-
ous in themselves.† The contempt of artiﬁce, stratagem, and surprise,
proceeds often, as in the case of Achilles, from a noble conﬁdence in
personal valour and strength: and it must be owned that when we can
defeat an enemy by open force in a pitched battle, we may entertain a
better-grounded belief that we have subdued him and compelled him
to sue for peace, than if we had gained the advantage over him by sur-
prise,—as Livy‡ makes those generous senators say, who did notapprove
of the insincere mode of proceeding which had been adopted towards
Perseus.58 Therefore, when plain and open courage can secure the vic-
* This was the practice of the ancient Gauls. See Livy.—It is said of Achilles, that
he was for ﬁghting openly, and not of a disposition to conceal himself in the famous
wooden horse which proved fatal to the Trojans:—
Ille non, inclusus equo Minervae
Sacra mentito, male feriatos
Troas, et laetam Priami choreis
Falleret aulam;
Sed palam captis gravis. . . . Hor. lib. iv. od. 6.
[[“He would not have hidden within the horse that feigned sacriﬁce to Mi-
nerva, not striven to deceive the Trojans keeping ill-timed holiday,orPriam’s
court taking joy in dances but with open cruelty to his captives.” Horace,
Odes 4.6.13–17.]]
† Virg. Aen. ii. 390.
‡ Tit. Liv. lib. xlii. cap. 47.
58. Perseus, king of Macedonia (r. 179–168 b.c.). In books 39–44 of Livy’s History
of Rome, Livy argued that the leaders of the empire had always planned to subjugate
Macedonia and were inconsistent and unfair to Perseus in justifying war againsthim.
The result was the defeat of Perseus at Pydna in b.c. 168, along with his capture and
imprisonment.

582
book iii: of war
tory, there are occasions when it is preferable to artiﬁce, because it pro-
cures to the state a greater and more permanent advantage.
The employment of spies is a kind of clandestine practice or deceit
in war. These ﬁnd means to insinuate themselves among the enemy, in
order to discover the state of his affairs, to pry into his designs, and then
give intelligence to their employer. Spies are generally condemned to
capital punishment, and with great justice, since we have scarcely any
other means of guarding against the mischief they may do us (§155). For
this reason, a man of honour, who is unwilling to expose himself to an
ignominious death from the hand of a common executioner, ever de-
clines serving as a spy: and moreover he looks upon the ofﬁce as un-
worthy of him, because it cannot be performed without some degree of
treachery. The sovereign, therefore, has no right to require such a service
of his subjects, unless perhaps <376> in some singular case, and that of
the highest importance. It remains for him to hold out the temptation
of a reward, as an inducement to mercenary souls to engage in the busi-
ness. If those whom he employs make a voluntary tender of their ser-
vices, or if they be neither subject to nor in any wise connected with the
enemy, he may unquestionably take advantage of their exertions, with-
out any violation of justice or honour. But is it lawful, is it honourable,
to solicit the enemy’s subjects to act as spies, and betray him? To this
question the following section will furnish an answer.
It is asked in general whether it be lawful to seduce the enemy’s men,
for the purpose of engaging them to transgress theirdutybyaninfamous
treachery? Here a distinction must be made between what is due to the
enemy notwithstanding the state of warfare, and what is required by the
internal laws of conscience, and the rules of propriety. We may lawfully
endeavour to weaken the enemy by all possible means (§138), provided
they do not affect the common safety of human society, as do poison
and assassination (§155). Now, in seducing a subject to turn spy, or the
governor of a town to deliver it up to us, we do not strike at the foun-
dation of the common safety and welfare of mankind. Subjects acting
as spies to an enemy do not cause a fatal and unavoidable evil: it is pos-
sible to guard against them to a certain degree; and as to the security of
fortresses, it is the sovereign’s business to be careful in the choice of the
§180. Clan-
destine se-
duction of the
enemy’s people.
§179. Spies.


chapter x
583
governors to whom he intrusts them. Those measures, therefore, are not
contrary to the external law of nations; nor can the enemy complain of
them as odious proceedings. Accordingly they are practised in all wars.
But are they honourable, and compatible with the laws of a pure con-
science? Certainly no: and of this the generals themselves are sensible,
as they are never heard to boast of having practised them. Seducing a
subject to betray his country, engaging a traitor to set ﬁre to a magazine,
tampering with the ﬁdelity of a governor, enticing him, persuading him
to deliver up the town intrusted to his charge, is prompting suchpersons
to commit detestable crimes. Is it honourable to corrupt our most in-
veterate enemy, and tempt him to the commission of a crime? If such
practices are at all excusable, it can be only in a very just war, and when
the immediate object is to save our country when threatened with ruin
by a lawless conqueror. On such an occasion (as it should seem) the
guilt of the subject or general who should betray his sovereign when
engaged in an evidently unjust cause, would not be of so very odious
a nature. He who himself tramples upon justice and probity, deserves
in his turn to feel the effects of wickedness and perﬁdy.* And if ever
it is excusable to depart from the strict <377> rules of honour, it is
against such an enemy, and in such an extremity. The Romans, whose
ideas concerning the rights of war were in general so pure and elevated,
did not approve of such clandestine practices. They made no account
of the consul Caepio’s victory over Viriatus, because it had been ob-
tained by means of bribery.59 Valerius Maximus asserts that it was
* Xenophonvery properlyexpressesthereasonswhichrendertreacherydetestable,
and which authorise us to repress it by other means than openforce. “Treachery”(says
he) “is more dreadful than open war, in proportion as it is more difﬁcult to guard
against clandestine plots than against an open attack: it is also more odious, because
men engaged in overt hostilities may again treat together, and come to a sincere rec-
onciliation, whereas nobody can venture to treat with or repose any conﬁdence in a
man whom he has once found guilty of treachery.” Hist. Graec. lib. ii. cap. 3. [[Note
added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
59. Viriatus (180–139 b.c.) sought to maintain Lusitanian independence and de-
feated the Roman general Quintus Fabius Maximus Servilianus in 140 b.c. The
latter’s successor, Servilius Caepio, contrived the murder of Viriatus in 139 b.c.


584
book iii: of war
stained with a double perﬁdy;* and another historian says that the sen-
ate did not approve of it.†
It is a different thing merely to accept of the offers of a traitor. We
do not seduce him: and we may take advantage of his crime, while at
the same time we detest it. Fugitives and deserters commit a crime
against their sovereign; yet we receive and harbour them by the rights of
war, as the civil law expresses it.‡ If a governor sells himself, and offers
for a sum of money to deliver up his town, shall we scruple to take ad-
vantage of his crime, and to obtain without danger what we have a right
to take by force? But when we feel ourselves able to succeed without the
assistance of traitors, it is noble to reject their offers with detestation.
The Romans, in their heroic ages, in those times when they used to dis-
play such illustrious examples of magnanimity and virtue, constantly
rejected with indignation every advantage presented to them by the
treachery of any of the enemy’s subjects. They not only acquaintedPyr-
rhus with the atrocious design of his physician, but also refused to take
advantage of a less heinous crime, and sent back to the Falisci, bound
and fettered, a traitor who had offered to deliver up the king’s children.§
* Viriati etiam caedes duplicem persidiae accusationem recepit; in amicis, quod
eorum manibus interemptus est; in Q. Servilio Caepione consule, quia is sceleris hu-
jus auctor, impunitate promissa, fuit, victoriamque non meruit, sed emit. lib. ix. cap.
6. [[“Indeed the killing of Viriatus brought a double accusation of treachery, on the
part of his friends, because he was done away with at their hands, and on the part of
Q. Servilius Caepio the consul, because he was the instigator of thiscrime,promising
immunity, and he did not earn but purchased his victory” (trans. Eds.).]] Although
this instance seems to belong to another head (that of assassination), I nevertheless
quote it here, because it does not appear from other authors that Caepio had induced
Viriatus’s soldiers to assassinate him. Among others, see Eutropius, lib. vi. cap. 8.
† Quae victoria, quia empta erat, a senatu non probata. [[“Because this victory
was purchased it was not commended by the senate.”]] Auctor de VirisIllust.[[Sextus
Aurelius Victor]] cap. 71.
‡ Transfugam jure belli recipimus. [[“By the law of war we take back the de-
serter.”]] Digest. [[Justinian]] l. xli. tit. 1, de adquir. Rer. Dom. leg. 51.
§ Eaˆdem ﬁde indicatum Pyrrho regi medicum vitae ejus insidiantem; eaˆdem Fal-
iscis vinctum traditum proditorem liberorum regis. [[“This [Roman] sense of honor
made them warn Pyrrhus against his physician who was plotting against his life; it
made them hand over to the Faliscans as a prisoner the betrayer of their children.”]]
Tit. Liv. lib. xlii. cap. 47.
§181. Whether
the offers of a
traitor may
be accepted.

chapter x
585
But when intestine divisions prevail among the enemy, we may with-
out scruple hold a correspondence with one of the parties, and avail
ourselves of the right which they think they have to injure the opposite
party. Thus we promote our own interests, without seducing any person
or being in anywise partakers of his guilt. If we take advantage of his
error, this is doubtless allowable against an enemy.
Deceitful intelligence is that of a man who feigns to betray his own
party, with a view of drawing the enemy into a snare. <378> If he does
this deliberately, and has himself made the ﬁrst overtures, it is treachery,
and an infamous procedure: but an ofﬁcer, or the governor of a town,
when tampered with by the enemy, may, on certain occasions, lawfully
feign acquiescence to the proposal with a view to deceive the seducer:
an insult is offered to him in tempting his ﬁdelity; and to draw the
tempter into the snare, is no more than a just vengeance. By thisconduct
he neither violates the faith of promises, nor impairs the happiness of
mankind: for criminal engagements are absolutely void,andoughtnever
to be fulﬁlled; and it would be a fortunate circumstance if the promises
of traitors could never be relied on, but were on all sides surrounded
with uncertainties and dangers. Therefore a superior, on information
that the enemy is tempting the ﬁdelity of an ofﬁcer or soldier, makes no
scruple of ordering that subaltern to feign himself gained over, and to
arrange his pretended treachery so as to draw the enemy into an am-
buscade. The subaltern is obliged to obey. But when a direct attempt is
made to seduce the commander in chief, a man of honour generally
prefers, and ought to prefer, the alternative of explicitly and indignantly
rejecting so disgraceful a proposal.*
* When the duke of Parma [[Alessandro Farnese, r. 1586–92]] was engaged in the
siege of Bergen-op-zoom [[1588]], two Spanish prisoners, who were conﬁned in afort
near the town, attempted to gain over a tavern-keeper, and an English soldier, to
betray that fort to the duke. These men having acquainted the governor with the
circumstance, received orders from him to feign acquiescence; and, accordingly,hav-
ing made all their arrangements with the duke of Parma for the surprisal of the fort,
they gave notice of every particular to the governor. He, inconsequence,kepthimself
prepared to give a proper reception to the Spaniards, who fell into the snare, and lost
near three thousand men on the occasion. Grotius, Hist. of the Disturb. in the Neth-
erlands, book i. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§182.
Deceitful
intelligence.


586
book iii: of war
chapter xi
Of the Sovereign who wages an unjust War.
He who is engaged in war derives all his right from the justice of his
cause. The unjust adversary who attacks or threatens him,—who with-
holds what belongs to him,—in a word, who does him an injury,—lays
him under the necessity of defending himself, or of doing himself jus-
tice, by force of arms: he authorises him in all the acts of hostility nec-
essary for obtaining complete satisfaction. Whoever therefore takes up
arms without a lawful cause, canabsolutelyhavenorightwhatever:every
act of hostility that he commits is an act of injustice.
He is chargeable with all the evils, all the horrors of the war: all the
effusion of blood, the desolation of families, the rapine, the acts of vi-
olence, the ravages, the conﬂagrations, are his works and his crimes. He
is guilty of a crime against the ene-<379>my, whom he attacks, op-
presses, and massacres, without cause: he is guilty of a crime against his
people, whom he forces into acts of injustice, and exposes to danger,
without reason or necessity,—against those of his subjects who are ru-
ined or distressed by the war,—who lose their lives, their property, or
their health, in consequence of it: ﬁnally, he is guilty of a crime against
mankind in general, whose peace he disturbs, and to whom he sets a
pernicious example. Shockingcatalogueof miseriesandcrimes!dreadful
account to be given to the king of kings, to the common father of men!
May this slight sketch strike the eyes of the rulers of nations,—of
princes, and their ministers! Why may not we expect some beneﬁt from
it? Are we to suppose that the great are wholly lost to all sentiments of
honour, of humanity, of duty, and of religion? And should our weak
voice, throughout the whole succession of ages, prevent even one single
war, how gloriously would our studies and our labour be rewarded!
He who does an injury is bound to repair the damage, or to make
adequate satisfaction if the evil be irreparable, and even to submit to
punishment, if the punishment be necessary, either as an example, or
for the safety of the party offended, and for that of human society. In
this predicament stands a prince who is the author of an unjust war. He
§183. An
unjust war
gives no right
whatever.
§184. Great
guilt of the
sovereign who
undertakes it.
§185. His
obligations.


chapter xi
587
is under an obligation to restore whatever he has taken,—to send back
the prisoners at his own expense,—to make compensation to the enemy
for the calamities and losses he has brought on him,—to reinstateruined
families,—to repair, if it were possible, the loss of a father, a son, a
husband.
But how can he repair so many evils? Many are in their own nature
irreparable.Andastothosewhichmaybecompensatedbyanequivalent,
where shall the unjust warrior ﬁnd means to furnish an indemniﬁcation
for all his acts of violence? The prince’s private property will not be suf-
ﬁcient to answer the demands. Shall he give away that of his subjects?—
It does not belong to him. Shall he sacriﬁce the national lands, a part of
the state?—But the state is not his patrimony (Book I. §91): he cannot
dispose of it at will. And although the nation be, to a certain degree,
responsible for the acts of her ruler,—yet (exclusive of the injustice of
punishing her directly for faults of which she is not guilty) if she is re-
sponsible for her sovereign’s acts, that responsibility only regards other
nations, who look to her for redress (Book I. §40, Book II. §§81, 82): but
the sovereign cannot throw upon her the punishment due to his unjust
deeds, nor despoil her in order to make reparation for them. And, were
it even in his power, would this wash away his guilt, and leave him a
clear conscience? Though acquitted in the eyes of the enemy, would he
be so in the eyes of his people? It is a strange kind of justice which
prompts a man to make reparation for his own misdeeds at the expense
of a third person: this is no more than changing the object of his in-
justice. Weigh all these things, ye rulers of nations! and when clearly
<380> convinced that an unjust war draws you into a multitude of in-
iquities which all your power cannot repair, perhapsyouwillbelesshasty
to engage in it.
The restitution of conquests, of prisoners, and of all property that
still exists in a recoverable state, admits of no doubt when the injustice
of the war is acknowledged. The nation in her aggregate capacity, and
each individual particularly concerned, being convinced of the injustice
of their possession, are bound to relinquish it, and to restore every thing
which they have wrongfully acquired. But as to the reparation of any
damage, are the military, the generals, ofﬁcers, and soldiers, obliged in
§186. Difﬁ-
culty of re-
pairing the
injury he
has done.
§187. Whether
the nation and
the military
are bound to
any thing.

588
book iii: of war
conscience to repair the injuries which they have done, not of their own
will, but as instruments in the hands of their sovereign? I am surprised
that the judicious Grotius should, without distinction, hold the afﬁr-
mative.* It is a decision which cannot be supported except in the case
of a war so palpably and indisputably unjust, as not to admit a pre-
sumption of any secret reason of state that is capable of justifying it,—
a case in politics, which is nearly impossible. On alloccasionssusceptible
of doubt, the whole nation, the individuals, and especially the military,
are to submit their judgment to those who hold the reins of govern-
ment,—to the sovereign: this they are bound to do, by the essentialprin-
ciples of political society and of government. What would be the con-
sequence, if, at every step of the sovereign, the subjects were at liberty
to weigh the justice of his reasons, and refuse to march to a war which
might to them appear unjust? It often happens that prudence will not
permit a sovereign to disclose all his reasons. It is the duty of subjects to
suppose them just and wise, until clear and absolute evidence tells them
the contrary. When, therefore, under the impression of such an idea,
they have lent their assistance in a war which is afterwards found to be
unjust, the sovereign alone is guilty: he alone is bound to repair the in-
juries. The subjects, and in particular the military, are innocent: they
have acted only from a necessary obedience. They are bound, however,
to deliver up what they have acquired in such a war, because they have
no lawful title to possess it. This I believe to be the almost unanimous
opinion of all honest men, and of those ofﬁcers who are most distin-
guished for honour and probity. Their case, in the present instance, is
the same as that of all those who are the executors of the sovereign’s
orders. Government would be impracticable if every one of its instru-
ments was to weigh its commands, and thoroughly canvass their justice
before he obeyed them. But if they are bound by a regard for the welfare
of thestatetosupposethesovereign’sordersjust,theyarenotresponsible
for them. <381>
* De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. iii. cap. 10.


chapter xii
589
chapter xii
Of the Voluntary Law of Nations, as it regards the
Effects of Regular Warfare, independently of the
Justice of the Cause.
All the doctrines we have laid down in the preceding chapter, are evi-
dently deduced from sound principles,—from the eternal rules of jus-
tice: they are so many separate articles of that sacred law which nature,
or the divine author of nature, has prescribed to nations. He alone
whom justice and necessity have armed, has a right to make war; he
alone is empowered to attack his enemy, to deprive him of life, and
wrest from him his goods and possessions. Such is the decision of the
necessary law of nations, or of the law of nature, which nations are
strictly bound to observe (Prelim. §7): it is the inviolable rule that each
ought conscientiously to follow. But in the contests of nationsandsov-
ereigns who live together in a state of nature, how can this rule be en-
forced? They acknowledge no superior. Who then shall be judge be-
tween them, to assign to each his rights and obligations,—to say to the
one, “You have a right to take up arms, to attack your enemy, and sub-
due him by force,”—and to the other, “Every act of hostility that you
commit will be an act of injustice; your victories will be so many mur-
ders, your conquests rapines and robberies?” Every free and sovereign
state has a right to determine, according to the dictates of her own
conscience, what her duties require of her, and what she can or cannot
do with justice (Prelim. §16). If other nations take upon themselves to
judge of her conduct, they invade her liberty, and infringe her most
valuable rights (Prelim. §15): and, moreover, each party asserting that
they have justice on their own side, will arrogate to themselves all the
rights of war, and maintain that their enemy has none, that his hos-
tilities are so many acts of robbery, so many infractions of the law of
nations, in the punishment of which all states should unite. The de-
cision of the controversy, and of the justice of the cause, is so far from
being forwarded by it, that the quarrel will become more bloody, more
§188. Nations
not rigidly to
enforce the
law of nature
against each
other.


590
book iii: of war
calamitous in its effects, and also more difﬁcult to terminate. Nor is
this all: the neutral nations themselves will be drawn into the dispute,
and involved in the quarrel. If an unjust war cannot, in its effect,confer
any right, no certain possession can be obtained of any thing taken in
war, until some acknowledged judge (and there is none such between
nations) shall have deﬁnitively pronounced concerning the justice of
the cause: and things so acquired will ever remain liable to be claimed,
as property carried off by robbers.
Let us then leave the strictness of the necessary law of nature <382>
to the conscience of sovereigns; undoubtedly they are never allowed to
deviate from it. But as to the external effects of the law among men, we
must necessarily have recourse to rules that shall be more certain and
easy in the application, and this for the very safety and advantage of the
great society of mankind. These are the rules of the voluntary law of
nations (Prelim. §21). The law of nature, whose object it is to promote
the welfareof humansociety,andtoprotectthelibertiesof allnations,—
which requires that the affairs of sovereigns should be brought to an
issue, and their quarrels determined and carried to a speedy conclu-
sion,—that law, I say, recommends the observance of the voluntary law
of nations, for the common advantage of states, in the same manner as
it approves of the alterations which the civil law makes in the rules of
the law of nature, with a view to render them more suitable to the state
of political society, and more easy and certain in their application. Let
us therefore apply totheparticularsubjectof warthegeneralobservation
made in our Preliminaries (§28)—a nation, a sovereign, when deliber-
ating on the measures he is to pursue in order to fulﬁl his duty, ought
never to lose sight of the necessary law, whose obligation on the con-
science is inviolable: but in examining what he may require of other
states, he ought to pay a deference to the voluntary law of nations, and
restrict even his just claims by the rules of that law, whose maxims have
for their object the happiness and advantage of the universal society of
nations. Though the necessary law be the rule which he invariably ob-
serves in his own conduct, he should allow others to avail themselves of
the voluntary law of nations.
§189. Why
they ought to
admit the
voluntary law
of nations.


chapter xii
591
The ﬁrst rule of that law, respecting the subject under consideration,
is, that regular war, as to its effects, is to be accounted just on both sides.
This is absolutely necessary, as we have just shewn, if people wish to
introduce any order, any regularity, into so violent an operation as that
of arms, or to set any bounds to the calamities of which it is productive,
and leave a door constantly open for the return of peace. It is even im-
possible to point out any other rule of conduct to be observed between
nations, since they acknowledge no superior judge.
Thus the rights founded on the state of war, the lawfulness of its
effects, the validity of the acquisitions made by arms, do not, externally
and between mankind, depend on the justice of the cause, but on the
legality of the means in themselves,—that is, on every thing requisite to
constitute a regular war. If the enemy observes all the rules of regular
warfare (see Chap. III. of this Book), we are not entitled to complain of
him as a violator of the law of nations. He has the same pretensions to
justice as we ourselves have; and all our resource lies in victory or an
accommodation.
Second rule. The justice of the cause being reputed equal between
two enemies, whatever is permitted to the one in virtue of the state of war,
is also permitted to the other. Accordingly, <383> no nation, under pre-
tence of having justice on her side, ever complains of the hostilities of
her enemy, while he conﬁnes them within the limits prescribed by the
common laws of war. We have, in the preceding chapters, treated of
what is allowable in a just war. It is precisely that, and no more, which
the voluntary law equally authorises in bothparties.Thatlawputsthings
between both on a parity, but allows to neither what is in itself unlaw-
ful: it can never countenance unbridled licentiousness. If thereforena-
tions transgress those bounds,—if they carry hostilities beyond what
the internal and necessary law permits in general for the support of a
just cause,—far be it from us to attribute these excesses to thevoluntary
law of nations: they are solely imputable to a depravation of manners,
which produces an unjust and barbarous custom. Such are thosehorrid
enormities sometimes committed by the soldiery in a town taken by
storm.
§190. Regular
war, as to its
effects, is to be
accounted just
on both sides.
§191. What-
ever is per-
mitted to one
party, is so to
the other.


592
book iii: of war
3. We must never forget that this voluntary law of nations, which is
admitted only through necessity, and with a view to avoid greater evils
(§§188, 189), does not, to him who takes up arms in an unjust cause, give
any real right that is capable of justifying his conduct and acquitting his
conscience, but merely entitles him to the beneﬁt of the external effect of the
law, and to impunity among mankind. This sufﬁciently appears from
what we have said in establishing the voluntary law of nations. The sov-
ereign, therefore, whose arms are not sanctioned by justice, is not the
less unjust, or less guilty of violating the sacred law of nature, although
that law itself (with a view to avoid aggravating the evils of human so-
ciety by an attempt to prevent them) requires that he be allowed toenjoy
the same external rights as justly belong to his enemy. In the same man-
ner, the civil law authorises a debtor to refuse payment of his debts in a
case of prescription: but he then violates his duty: he takes advantage of
a law which was enacted with a view to prevent the endless increase of
law-suits: but his conduct is not justiﬁable upon any grounds of genuine
right.
From the unanimity that in fact prevails between states in observing
the rules which we refer to the voluntary law of nations,Grotiusassumes
for their foundation an actual consenton thepartof mankind,andrefers
them to the arbitrary law of nations. But, exclusive of the difﬁculty
which would often occur in proving such agreement, it would be of no
validity except against those who had formally entered into it. If such
an engagement existed, it would belong to the conventional law of na-
tions, which must be proved by history, not by argument,andisfounded
on facts, not on principles. In this work we lay down the natural prin-
ciples of the law of nations. We deduce them from nature itself; and
what we call the voluntary law of nations, consists in rules of conduct
and of external right, to which nations are, by the law of nature, bound
to consent; so that we are authorised to presume their consent, without
seeking for a record of it in the annals of the world; because, <384>even
if they had not given it, the law of nature supplies their omission, and
gives it for them. In this particular, nations have not the option of giving
or with-holding their consent at pleasure: the refusal to give it would be
an infringement of the common rights of nations (Prelim. §21).
§192. The
voluntary law
gives no more
than impunity
to him who
wages an
unjust war.


chapter xiii
593
This voluntary law of nations, thus established, is of very extensive
use, and is far from being a chimera, an arbitrary or groundless ﬁction.
It ﬂows from the same source, and is founded on the same principles,
with the natural and necessary law. For what other reason does nature
prescribe such and such rules of conduct to men, except because those
rules are necessary to the safety and welfare of mankind? Butthemaxims
of the necessary law of nations are founded immediately on the nature
of things, and particularly on that of man, and of political society. The
voluntary law of nations supposes an additional principle,—the nature
of the great society of nations, and of their mutual intercourse. The
necessary law enjoins to nations what is absolutely indispensable, and
what naturally tends to their perfection and common happiness. The
voluntary law tolerates what cannot be avoided without introducing
greater evils.
chapter xiii
Of Acquisitions by War, and
particularly of Conquests.
If it be lawful to carry off things belonging to an enemy, with a view of
weakening him (§160), and sometimes of punishing him (§162), it is no
less lawful in a just war to appropriate them to our own use, by way of
compensation, which the civilians term expletio juris (§161). They are
retained as an equivalent for what is due by the enemy, for the expenses
and damages which he has occasioned, and even (when there is cause to
punish him) as a commutation for the punishment he has deserved. For
when I cannot obtain the individual thing which belongs or is due to
me, I have a right to an equivalent, which, by the rulesof expletivejustice,
and inmoral estimation,isconsideredasthethingitself.Thus,according
to the law of nature, which constitutes the necessary law of nations,war
founded on justice is a lawful mode of acquisition.
But that sacred law does not authorise even the acquisitions made in
a just war, any farther than as they are approved by justice,—that is to
say, no farther than is requisite to obtain complete satisfaction in the
§193. How
war is a
method of
acquisition.
§194. Measure
of the right
it gives.

594
book iii: of war
degree necessary for accomplishing the lawful ends we have just men-
tioned. An equitable conqueror, deaf to the suggestionsof ambitionand
avarice, will make a just estimate of what is due to him,—that is to say,
of the thing which has been the subject of the war (if the thing itself is
no longer reco-<385>verable), and of the damages and expenses of the
war,—and will retain no more of the enemy’s property than what is
precisely sufﬁcient to furnish the equivalent. But if he has to do with a
perﬁdious, restless, and dangerous enemy, he will, by way of punish-
ment, deprive him of some of his towns or provinces, and keep them
to serve as a barrier to his own dominions. Nothing is more allowable
than to weaken an enemy who has rendered himself suspected and for-
midable. The lawful end of punishment is future security. The condi-
tions necessary for rendering an acquisition, made by arms, just and ir-
reproachable before God and our own conscience, are these—justice in
the cause, and equity in the measure of the satisfaction.
But nations cannot, in their dealings with each other, insist on this
rigid justice. By the rules of the voluntary law of nations, every regular
war is on both sides accounted just, as to its effects (§190); and no one
has a right to judge a nation, respecting the unreasonableness of her
claims, or what she thinks necessary for her own safety (Prelim. §21).
Every acquisition, therefore, which has been made in regular warfare, is
valid according to the voluntary law of nations, independently of the
justice of the cause, and the reasons which may have induced the con-
querorto assumethepropertyof whathehastaken.Accordingly,nations
have ever esteemed conquest a lawful title; and that title has seldombeen
disputed, unless where it was derived from a war not only unjustinitself,
but even destitute of any plausible pretext.
The property of movable effects is vested in the enemy from the mo-
ment they come into his power; and if he sells them to neutral nations,
the former proprietor is not entitled to claim them. Butsuchthingsmust
be actually and truly in the enemy’s power, and carried to a place of
safety. Suppose a foreigner coming into our country buys a portion of
the booty which a party of enemies have just taken from us: our men
who are in pursuit of this party may very justly seize on the booty which
that foreigner was over precipitate in buying. On this head Grotius
§195. Rules of
the voluntary
law of nations.
§196. Acqui-
sition of
movable
property.


chapter xiii
595
quotes from De Thou the instance of the town of Lierre in Brabant,
which having been captured and recaptured on the same day, the booty
taken from the inhabitants was restored to them because it had not been
twenty-four hours in the enemy’s hands.* This space of twenty-four
hours, together with the practice observed at sea,† is an institution of
the law of nations established by agreement or custom, and is even a
civil law in some states. The natural reason of the conduct adopted to-
wards the inhabitants of Lierre is, that the enemy being taken as it were
in the fact, and before they had carried off the booty, it was not looked
upon as having absolutely become their property, or been lost to the
inhabitants. Thus, at sea, a ship taken by <386> the enemy, may be re-
taken and delivered by other ships of her own party, as long as she has
not been carried into some port, or into the midst of a ﬂeet: her fate is
not decided, nor is the owner’s property irrecoverably lost, until theship
be in a place of safety with regard to the enemy who has taken her, and
entirely in his power. But the ordinances of every state may make dif-
ferent regulations on this head between the citizens,‡ with a view either
to prevent disputes or to encourage armed vessels to retake merchant
ships that have fallen into the enemy’s hands.
The justice or injustice of the cause does not here become an object
of consideration. There would be no stability in the affairs of mankind,
no safety in trading with nations engaged in war, if we were allowed to
draw a distinction between a just and an unjust war, so as to attribute
lawful effects to the one, which we denied to the other. It wouldbeopen-
ing a door to endless discussions and quarrels. This reason is of such
weight, that, on account of it, the effects of a public war, at least with
regard to movables, have been allowed to expeditions which deserved
no other name than that of predatory enterprises, though carried on by
regular armies. When, after thewars of theEnglishinFrance,thegrandes
compagnies ranged about Europe, sacking and pillaging wherever they
came, none of the sufferers was ever known to claim the booty which
* Grotius, de Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. iii. cap. 6, §3, n. 7.
† See Grotius, ibid. and in the text.
‡ Grotius, ibid.


596
book iii: of war
those plunderers had carried off and sold. At present it would be in vain
to claim a ship taken by the Barbary corsairs, and sold to a third party,
or retaken from the captors; though it is very improperlythatthepiracies
of those barbarians can be considered as acts of regular war. We here
speak of the external right: the internal right and the obligations of con-
science undoubtedly require that we should restore to a third party the
property we recover from an enemy who had despoiled him of it in an
unjust war,—provided he can recognise that property, and will defray
the expenses we have incurred in recovering it. Grotius quotes many
instances of sovereigns and commanders who have generously restored
such booty, even without requiring any thing for their trouble or ex-
pense.* But such conduct is pursued only in cases where the booty has
been recently taken. It would be an impracticable task, scrupulously to
seek out the proprietors of what has been captured a long time back:
and moreover they have, no doubt, relinquished all their right to things
which they had no longer any hopeof recovering.Suchistheusualmode
of thinking with respect to captures in war, which are soon given up as
irrecoverably lost.
Immovable possessions, lands, towns, provinces, &c. become the
property of the enemy who makes himself master of them: but it is only
by the treaty of peace, or the entire submission and extinction of the
state to which those towns and provinces belonged, that the acquisition
is completed, and the property becomes stable and perfect. <387>
Thus a third party cannot safely purchase a conquered town or prov-
ince, till the sovereign from whom it was taken has renounced it by a
treaty of peace, or has been irretrievably subdued, and has lost his sov-
ereignty: for, while the war continues,—while the sovereign has still
hopes of recoveringhis possessionsbyarms,—isaneutralprincetocome
and deprive him of the opportunity by purchasingthattownorprovince
from the conqueror? The original proprietor cannot forfeit his rights by
the act of a third person; and if the purchaser be determinedtomaintain
his purchase, he will ﬁnd himself involved in the war. Thus the king of
Prussia became a party with the enemies of Sweden, by receivingStettin
* Grotius, lib. iii. cap. 16 [[Law of War and Peace]].
§197. Acqui-
sition of im-
moveables,—
or conquest.
§198. How to
transfer them
validly.


Of Nations considered in themselves
chapter i
Of Nations or Sovereign States.
A nation or a state is, as has been said at the beginning of this work, a
body politic, or a society of men united together for the purpose of
promoting their mutual safety and advantage by their combined
strength.
From the very design that induces a number of men to form a society
which has its common interests, and which is to act in concert, it is nec-
essary that there should be established a public authority, to order and
direct what is to be done by each in relation to the end of theassociation.
This political authority is the sovereignty; and he or they who are in-
vested with it are the sovereign.
It is evident, that, by the very act of the civil or political association,
each citizen subjects himself to the authority of the entire body, in every
thing that relates to the common welfare. The authority of all over each
member, therefore, essentially belongs to the body politic, or state; but
§1. Of the
state, and of
sovereignty.
§2. The
authority
of the body
politic over
the members.


82
book i: nations in themselves
the exercise of that authority maybeplacedindifferenthands,according
as the society may have ordained. <2>
If the body of the nation keeps in its own hands the empire or the
right to command, it is a popular government, a democracy; if itentrusts
it to a certain number of citizens, to a senate, it establishes anaristocratic
republic; ﬁnally, if it conﬁdes the government to a single person, the
state becomes a monarchy.
These three kinds of government may be variously combined and
modiﬁed. We shall not here enter into the particulars; this subject be-
longing to the public universal law:* for the object of the present work,
* Nor shall we examine which of those different kinds of government is the best.
It will be sufﬁcient to say in general, that the monarchical form appears preferable to
every other, provided the power of the sovereign be limited, and not absolute—qui
[principatus] tum demum regius est, si intra modestiae et mediocritatis ﬁnes se con-
tineat, excessu potestatis, quam imprudentes in dies augere satagunt, minuitur, pen-
itusque corrumpitur. Nos stulti, majoris, potentiae specie decepti, dilabimur in con-
trarium, non satis considerantes eam demum tutam esse potentiam quae viribus
modum imponit. [[“This [sovereignty] is indeed kingly, if it conﬁnes itself within
the bounds of modesty and moderation, with a withdrawal from power. The impru-
dent daily concernthemselves to extend suchpower,butitisdiminishedandinwardly
corrupted. We fools, taken in by the appearance of superior power, lurch to the op-
posite conclusion, not sufﬁciently considering that in the end that power is secure
which imposes due measure on its energies” (trans. Eds.). The source is unidentiﬁed,
but the last sentence quotes Valerius Maximus, Factorum et dictorum memorabilium
libri novem, exemplum externum 8, the story of Theopompus.]] The maxim has
both truth and wisdom on its side. The author here quotes the saying of Theopom-
pus, king of Sparta [[720–675 b.c.]], who returning to his house amidst the accla-
mations of the people after the establishment of the Ephori,—“You willleavetoyour
children (said his wife) an authority diminished through your fault.” “True (replied
the king): I shall leave them a smaller portion of it; but it will rest upon a ﬁrmer
basis.” [[Five Ephors were elected annually to “uphold” the rule of the kings, but
instead they became a constraint on the power of the two Spartan kings; hence the
comment by Theopompus’s wife.]] The Lacedaemonians, during a certain period,
had two chiefs to whom they very improperly gave the title of kings. They were
magistrates who possessed a very limited power, and whom it was not unusual to cite
before the tribunal of justice,—to arrest,—to condemn to death.—Sweden acts with
less impropriety in continuing to bestow on her chief the title of king, although she
has circumscribed his power within very narrow bounds. He shares not his authority
with a colleague,—he is hereditary,—and the state has,fromtimeimmemorial,borne
the title of a kingdom. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§3. Of the
several kinds of
government.


chapter i
83
it is sufﬁcient to establish the generalprinciplesnecessaryforthedecision
of those disputes that may arise between nations.
Every nation that governs itself, under what form soever, withoutde-
pendence on any foreign power, is a sovereign state. Itsrightsarenaturally
the same as those of any other state. Such are the moral persons who
live together in a natural society, subject to the law of nations. To give
a nation a right to make an immediate ﬁgure in this grand society, it is
sufﬁcient that it be really sovereign and independent, that is, that it gov-
ern itself by its own authority and laws.
We ought therefore to account as sovereign states those which have
united themselves to another more powerful, by an unequal alliance, in
which, as Aristotle says, to the more powerful is given more honour, and
to the weaker, more assistance.3
The conditions of those unequal alliances may be inﬁnitely varied.
But whatever they are, provided the inferior ally reserve to itself the sov-
ereignty, or the rightof governingitsownbody,itoughttobeconsidered
as an independent state, that keeps up an intercourse with others under
the authority of the law of nations.
Consequently a weak state, which, in order to provide for its safety,
places itself under the protection of a more powerful one, and engages,
in return, to perform several ofﬁces equivalent to that protection, with-
out however divesting itself of the right of <3> government and sov-
ereignty,—that state, I say, does not, on this account, cease to rank
among the sovereigns who acknowledge no other law than that of
nations.
There occurs no greater difﬁculty with respect to tributary states; for
though the payment of tribute to a foreign power does in some degree
diminish the dignity of those states, from its being a confession of their
weakness,—yet it suffers their sovereignty to subsist entire. The custom
of paying tribute was formerly very common,—the weaker by that
means purchasing of their more powerful neighbouranexemptionfrom
oppression, or at that price securing his protection, without ceasing to
be sovereigns.
3. This is Vattel’s sole reference to Aristotle.
§4. What are
sovereign
states.
§5. Of states
bound by
unequal
alliance.
§6. Or by
treaties of
protection.
§7. Of tribu-
tary states.

84
chapter xiii
597
from the hands of the king of Poland and the czar, under the title of
sequestration.* But when a sovereign has, by a deﬁnitive treaty of peace,
ceded a country to the conqueror, he has relinquished all the right he
had to it; and it were absurd that he should be allowed to demand the
restitution of thatcountry by a subsequentconquerorwhowrestsitfrom
the former, or by any other prince, who has purchased it, or received it
in exchange, or acquired it by any title whatever.
The conqueror who takes a town or province from his enemy, cannot
justly acquire over it any other rights than such as belonged to the sov-
ereign againstwhom hehas takenuparms.Warauthoriseshimtopossess
himself of what belongs to his enemy: if he deprives him of the sov-
ereignty of that town or province, he acquires it such as it is, with all its
limitations and modiﬁcations. Accordingly, care is usually taken to stip-
ulate, both in particular capitulations and in treaties of peace, that the
towns and countries ceded shall retain all their liberties, privileges, and
immunities. And why should they be deprived of them by the con-
queror, on account of his quarrel with their sovereign? Nevertheless, if
the inhabitants have been personally guilty of any crime against him, he
may, by way of punishment, deprive them of their rights and privileges.
This he may also do if the inhabitants have taken up arms against him,
and have thus directly become his enemies. In that case, he owes them
no more than what is due from a humane and equitable conqueror to
his vanquished foes. Should he purely and simply incorporatethemwith
his former states, they will have no cause of complaint.
Hitherto I evidently speak of a city or a country which is not simply
an integrant part of a nation, or which does not fully belong to a sov-
ereign, but over which that nation or that sovereign has certain rights.
If the conquered town or province fully and perfectly constituted a part
of the domain of a nation or sovereign, it passes on the same footing
into the power of the conqueror. Thenceforward united with the new
state to which it belongs,—if it be a loser by the change, that is a mis-
fortune which it must wholly impute to the chance of war. Thus, if a
town <388> which made part of a republic or a limited monarchy, and
* By the treaty of Schwedt, October 6, 1713.
§199. Condi-
tions on which
a conquered
town is
acquired.


598
book iii: of war
enjoyed a right of sending deputies to the supreme councilorthegeneral
assembly of the states, be justly conquered by an absolute monarch, she
must never more think of such privileges: they are what the constitution
of the new state to which she is annexed does not permit.
In the conquests of ancient times, even individuals lost their lands.
Nor is it matter of surprise that in the ﬁrst ages of Rome such a custom
should have prevailed. The wars of that aera were carried on between
popular republics and communities. The state possessed very little, and
the quarrel was in reality the common cause of all the citizens. But at
present war is less dreadful in its consequences to the subject: matters
are conducted with more humanity: one sovereign makes war against
another sovereign, and not against the unarmed citizens. Theconqueror
seizes on the possessions of the state, the public property, while private
individuals are permitted to retain theirs. They suffer but indirectly by
the war; and the conquest only subjects them to a new master.
But if the entire state be conquered, if the nation be subdued,inwhat
manner can the victor treat it, without transgressing the bounds of jus-
tice? What are his rights over the conquered country? Some have dared
to advance this monstrous principle, that the conqueror is absolutemas-
ter of his conquest,—that he may dispose of it as his property,—thathe
may treat it as hepleases, accordingtothecommonexpressionof treating
a state as a conquered country; and hence they derive one of the sources
of despoticgovernment.But,disregardingsuchwriters,whoreducemen
to the state of transferable goods, or beasts of burthen,—who deliver
them up as the property or patrimony of another man,—let us argue on
principles countenanced by reason, and conformable to humanity.
The whole right of the conqueror is derived from justiﬁable self-
defence (§§3, 26, 28), which comprehends the support and prosecution
of his rights. When, therefore, he has totally subdued a hostile nation,
he undoubtedly may, in the ﬁrst place, do himself justice respecting the
object which had given rise to the war, and indemnify himself for the
expenses and damages he has sustained by it: he may, according to
the exigency of the case, subject the nation to punishment, by way of
example: he may even, if prudence so require, render her incapable
of doing mischief with the same ease in future. But, for the attainment
§200. Lands
of private
persons.
§201.
Conquest of
the whole
state.


chapter xiii
599
of these different objects, he is to prefer the gentlest methods,—still
bearing in mind, that the doing of harm to an enemy is no farther au-
thorised by the law of nature, than in the precise degree which is nec-
essary for justiﬁable self-defence, and reasonable security for the time to
come. Some princes have contented themselves with imposing a tribute
on the conquered nation,—others, with depriving her of some of her
rights, taking from her a province, or erecting fortresses to keep her in
awe: others, <389> again, conﬁning their quarrel to the sovereign alone,
have left the nation in the full enjoyment of all her rights,—onlysetting
over her a new sovereign, of their own appointment.
But if the conqueror thinks proper to retain the sovereignty of the
conquered state, and has a right to retain it, the same principles must
also determine the manner in which he is to treat thatstate. If itisagainst
the sovereign alone that he has just cause of complaint, reason plainly
evinces that he acquires no other rights by his conquest than such as
belonged to the sovereign whom he has dispossessed: and, on the sub-
mission of the people, he is bound to govern them according to the laws
of the state. If the people do not voluntarily submit, the state of war
still subsists.
A conqueror who has taken up arms, not only against the sovereign,
but against the nation herself, and whose intention it was to subdue a
ﬁerceand savagepeople,andonceforalltoreduceanobstinateenemy,—
such a conqueror may withjusticelay burthensontheconquerednation,
both as a compensation for theexpenses of thewar,andasapunishment.
He may, according to the degree of indocility apparent in their dispo-
sition, govern them with a tighter rein, so as to curb and subdue their
impetuous spirit: he may even, if necessary, keep them for some time
in a kind of slavery. But this forced condition ought to cease from the
moment the danger is over,—the moment the conquered people are
become citizens: for then the right of conquest is at an end, so far as
relates to the pursuit of those rigorous measures, since the conqueror
no longer ﬁnds it necessary to use extraordinary precautionsforhisown
defence and safety. Then at length every thing is to be rendered con-
formable to the rules of a wise government, and the duties of a good
prince.

600
book iii: of war
When a sovereign, arrogating to himself the absolute disposal of a
people whom he has conquered, attempts to reduce them to slavery, he
perpetuates the state of warfare between that nation and himself. The
Scythians said to Alexander the Great, “There is never any friendship
between the master and slave: in the midst of peace the rights of war
still subsist.”* Should it be said, that in such a case there may be peace,
and a kind of compact by which the conqueror consents to spare the
lives of the vanquished, on condition that they acknowledgethemselves
his slaves,—he who makes such an assertion is ignorant that war gives
no right to take away the life of an enemy who has laid down his arms,
and submitted (§140). But let us not dispute the point: let the man who
holds such principles of jurisprudence, keep them for his own use and
beneﬁt: he well deserves to be subject to such a law. But men of spirit,
to whom life is nothing, less than nothing, unless sweetenedwithliberty,
will always conceive themselves at war with that oppressor, though
<390> actual hostilities are suspended on their part through want of
ability. We may therefore safely venture to add, that if the conquered
country is to be really subject to the conqueror as to its lawful sovereign,
he must rule it according to the ends for which civil government has
been established. It is generally the prince alone who occasions the war,
and consequently the conquest. Surely it is enoughthataninnocentpeo-
ple suffer the calamities of war: must even peace itself become fatal to
them? A generous conqueror will study to relieve his new subjects, and
mitigate their condition: he will think it his indispensable duty. “Con-
quest (says an excellent man) ever leaves behind it an immense debt, the
discharge of which is absolutely necessary to acquit the conqueror, in
the eye of humanity.”†
It fortunately happens that, in this particular as in every thing else,
sound policy and humanity are in perfect accord. What ﬁdelity, what
assistance, can you expect from an oppressed people? Do you wish that
your conquest may prove a real addition to your strength, and be well
* Inter dominum et servum, nulla amicitia est; etiam in pace, belli tamen jura
servantur. Q. Curt. lib. vii. cap. 8.
† Montesquieu, in his Spirit of Laws. [[Book 10, chaps. 3–4.]]


chapter xiii
601
affected to you?—treat it as a father, as a true sovereign. I am charmed
with the generous answer recorded of an embassador from Privernum.
Being introduced to the Roman senate, he was asked by the consul—
“If we shew you clemency, what dependence can we have on the peace
you are come to sue for?” “If” (replied the embassador) “you grant it on
reasonable conditions, it will be safe and permanent: otherwise, it will
not last long.” Some took offence at the boldness of this speech; but the
more sensible part of the senate approved of the Privernian’s answer,
deeming it the proper language of a man, and a freeman. “Can it be
imagined (said those wise senators) that any nation, or even any indi-
vidual, will longer continue in an irksome and disagreeable condition,
than while compelled to submit to it? If those to whom you give peace
receive it voluntarily, it may be relied on: what ﬁdelity can you expect
from those whom you wish to reduce to slavery?”*—“The most secure
dominion,” said Camillus,60 “is that which is acceptable to those over
whom it is exercised.”†
Such are the rights which the law of nature gives to the conqueror,
and the duties which it imposes on him. The manner of exerting the
one, and fulﬁlling the other, varies according to circumstances. In gen-
eral, he ought to consult the true interests <391> of his own state, and
by sound policy to reconcile them, as far as possible, with those of the
conquered country. He may, in imitation of the kings of France, unite
and incorporate it with his own dominions. Such was the practice of the
Romans: but they did this in different modes according to cases and
* Quid, si poenam (inquit consul) remittimus vobis, qualem nos pacemvobiscum
habituros speremus? Si bonam dederitis, inquit, et ﬁdam et perpetuam; si malam,
haud diuturnam. Tum vero minari, nec id ambigue Privernatem, quidam, et illis vo-
cibus ad rebellandum incitari pacatos populos. Pars melior senatuˆs ad meliora responsa
trahere, et dicere viri et liberi vocem auditam: an credi posse ullum populum, aut
hominem denique, in eaˆ conditione cujus eum poeniteat, diutius quam necesse sit,
mansurum? ibi pacem esse ﬁdam, ubi voluntarii pacati sint; neque eo loco, ubi ser-
vitutem esse velint, ﬁdem sperandam esse. Tit. Liv. lib. viii. cap. 21.
† Certe id ﬁrmissimum longe imperium est, quo obedientes gaudent. Tit. Liv. lib.
viii. cap. 13.
60. Marius Furius Camillus, 446–364 b.c., Roman soldier and statesman. He
served as censor, and on ﬁve occasions as dictator.


602
book iii: of war
conjunctures. At a time when Rome stood in need of an increase of
population, she destroyed the town of Alba, which she feared to have as
a rival: but she received all its inhabitants within her walls, and thereby
gained so many new citizens. In after times the conquered cities were
left standing, and the freedom of Rome was given to the vanquished
inhabitants. Victory could not have proved so advantageous to those
people as their defeat.
The conqueror may likewise simply put himself in the place of the
sovereign whom he has dispossessed. Thus the Tartars have acted in
China: the empire was suffered to subsist in its former condition, except
that it fell under the dominion of a new race of sovereigns.
Lastly, the conqueror may rule his conquest as a separate state, and
permit it to retain its own form of government. But this method is dan-
gerous: it produces no real union of strength; it weakens the conquered
country, without making any considerable addition to the power of the
victorious state.
It is asked to whom the conquest belongs,—to the prince who has
made it, or to the state? This question ought never to have been heard
of. Can the prince, in his character of sovereign, act for any other end
than the good of the state? Whose are the forces which he employs in
his wars? Even if he made the conquest at his own expense, out of his
own revenue, or his private and patrimonial estates, does he not make
use of the personal exertions of his subjects in achieving it? does he not
shed their blood in the contest? But supposing even that he were to em-
ploy foreign or mercenary troops, does he not expose his nation to the
enemy’s resentment? does he not involve her in the war? And shall he
alone reap all the advantages of it? Is it not for the cause of the state,
and of the nation, that he takes up arms? The nation therefore has a just
claim to all the rights to which such war gives birth.
If the sovereign embarks in a war, of which his own personalinterests
are the sole ground,—as, for instance, to assert his right of succession
to a foreign sovereignty,—the question then assumes a new face. In this
affair the state is wholly unconcerned: but then the nation should be at
liberty either to refuse engaging in it, or to assist her prince, at her own
option. If he is empowered to employ the national force in support of
§202. To
whom the
conquest
belongs.


chapter xiv
603
his personal rights, he should, in such case, make no distinctionbetween
these rights and those of the state. The French law, which annexes to
the crown all acquisitions made by the king, should be the law of all
nations.
It has been observed (§196) that we may be obliged, if not externally,
yet in conscience, and by the laws of equity, to re-<392>store to a third
party the booty we have recovered out of the hands of an enemy who
had taken it from him in an unjust war. The obligation is more certain
and more extensive, with regard to a people whom our enemy had un-
justly oppressed. For a people thus spoiled of their liberty never re-
nounce the hope of recovering it. If they have not voluntarily incor-
porated themselves with the state by which they have been subdued,—
if they have not freely aided her in the war against us,—we certainly
ought so to use our victory, as not merely to give them a new master, but
to break their chains. To deliver an oppressed people is a noble fruit of
victory: it is a valuable advantage gained, thus to acquire a faithful
friend. The canton of Schweitz having wrested the country of Glaris
from the house of Austria, restored the inhabitants to their former lib-
erties; and Glaris, admitted into the Helvetic confederacy, formed the
sixth canton.*
chapter xiv
Of the Right of Postliminium.
The right of postliminium is that, in virtue of which, personsandthings
taken by the enemy are restored to their former state, now coming again
into the power of the nation to which they belonged.
The sovereign is bound to protect the persons and property of his
subjects, and to defend them against the enemy. When, therefore, a sub-
ject, or any part of his property, has fallen into the enemy’s possession,
should any fortunate event bring them again into the sovereign’s power,
* Histoire de la Confe´de´ration Helve´tique, par M. De Watteville. liv. iii. under
the year 1351.
§203. Whether
we are to set
at liberty a
people whom
the enemy
had unjustly
conquered.
§204. Deﬁni-
tion of the
right of post-
liminium.
§205. Founda-
tion of this
right.


604
book iii: of war
it is undoubtedly his duty to restore them to their former condition,—
to re-establish the persons in all their rights and obligations, to give back
the effects to the owners,—in a word, to replace every thing on the same
footing on which it stood previous to the enemy’s capture.
The justice or injustice of the war makes no difference in this case,—
not only, because, according to the voluntary law of nations, the war, as
to its effects, is reputed just on both sides, but likewise because war,
whether just or not, is a national concern; and if the subjects who ﬁght
or suffer in the national cause, should—after they have, either in their
persons or their property, fallen into the enemy’s power—be, by some
fortunate incident, restored to the hands of their own people,—there is
no reason why they should not be restored to their former condition. It
is the same as if they had never been taken. If the war be just on the part
of their nation, they were unjustly captured by the <393> enemy; and
thus nothing is more natural than to restore them as soon as it becomes
possible. If the war be unjust, they are under no greater obligation to
suffer in atonement for its injustice, than the rest of the nation. Fortune
brings down the evil on their heads, when they are taken: she delivers
them from it, when they escape. Here again it is the same as if they never
had been captured. Neither their own sovereign nor the enemy has any
particular right over them. The enemy has lost by one accident what he
had gained by another.
Persons return, and things are recovered, by the right of postliminium,
when, after having been taken by the enemy, they come again into the
power of their own nation (§204). This right, therefore, takes effect as
soon as such persons or things captured by the enemy fall into the hands
of soldiers belonging to their own nation, or are brought back to the
army, the camp, the territories of their sovereign, or the places under his
command.
Those who unite with us to carry on a war, are joint parties with us:
we are engaged in a common cause; our right is one and the same; and
they are considered as making but one body with us. Therefore when
persons or things captured by the enemy are retaken by our allies or
auxiliaries, or in any other manner fall into their hands, this, so far as
relates to the effect of the right, is precisely the same thing as if they
§206. How it
takes effect.
§207. Whether
it takes effect
among the
allies.


chapter xiv
605
were come again into our own power; since, in the cause in which we
are jointly embarked, our power and that of our allies is but one and the
same. The right of postliminium therefore takes effectamongthosewho
carry on the war in conjunction with us; and the persons and things
recovered by them from the enemy, are to be restored to their former
condition.
But does this right take place in the territories of our allies? Here a
distinction arises. If those allies make a common cause with us,—if they
are associates in the war,—we are necessarily entitled totherightof post-
liminium in their territories as well as in our own: for their state is united
with ours, and, together with it, constitutes but one party in the war we
carry on. But if, as in our times is frequently the practice, an ally only
gives us a stated succour stipulated by treaty, and does not himself come
to a rupture with our enemy, between whose state and his own, in their
immediate relations, peace continues to be observed,—in this case, only
the auxiliaries whom he sends to our assistance are partakers and asso-
ciates in the war; and his dominions remain in a state of neutrality.
Now the right of postliminium does not take effect in neutral coun-
tries: for when a nation chooses to remain neuter in a war, she is bound
to consider it as equally just on both sides, so far as relates toitseffects,—
and, consequently, to look upon every capture made by either party, as
a lawful acquisition. Toallowoneof theparties,inprejudicetotheother,
to enjoy in her dominions the rightof claimingthingstakenbythelatter,
or the <394> right of postliminium, would be declaring in favour of the
former, and departing from the line of neutrality.
Naturally, every kind of property might be recovered by the right of
postliminium; and there is no intrinsic reason why moveables should be
excepted in this case, provided they can becertainlyrecognisedandiden-
tiﬁed. Accordingly, the ancients, on recovering such things from the en-
emy, frequently restored them to their former owners.* Butthedifﬁculty
of recognising things of this nature, and the endless disputes which
would arise from the prosecution of the owners’ claims to them, have
been deemed motives of sufﬁcient weight for the general establishment
* See several instances in Grotius, book iii. chap. 16, §2 [[Law of War and Peace]].
§208. Of
no validity
in neutral
nations.
§209. What
things are
recoverable
by this right.

606
book iii: of war
of a contrary practice. To these considerations we may add, that, from
the little hope entertained of recovering effects taken by the enemy and
once carried to a place of safety, a reasonable presumption arises, that
the former owners have relinquished their property. It is therefore with
reason, that moveables or booty are excepted from the right of post-
liminium, unless retaken from the enemy immediately after his capture
of them; in which case, the proprietor neither ﬁnds a difﬁculty in re-
cognising his effects, nor is presumed to have relinquished them. And
as the custom has once been admitted, and is now well established,there
would be an injustice in violating it (Prelim. §26). Among the Romans,
indeed, slaves were not treated like other movable property; they, by the
right of postliminium, were restored to their masters, even when therest
of the booty was detained. The reason of this is evident: for, as it was at
all times easy to recognise a slave, and ascertain to whom he belonged,
the owner, still entertaining hopes of recovering him, was not supposed
to have relinquished his right.
Prisoners of war, who have given their parole,—territoriesandtowns,
which have submitted to the enemy, and have sworn or promised alle-
giance to him,—cannot of themselves return to their former condition
by the right of postliminium: for faith is to be kept even with enemies
(§174).
But if the sovereign retakes those towns, countries, or prisoners, who
had surrendered totheenemy,herecoversallhisformerrightsoverthem,
and is bound to re-establish them in their pristine condition (§205). In
this case they enjoy the right of postliminium without any breach of
their word, any violation of their plighted faith. The enemy loses by the
chance of war a right which the chance of war had before given him.
But concerning prisoners of war, a distinction is to be made. If they
wereentirely freeontheirparole,thesinglecircumstanceof theircoming
again into the power of their own nation does not release them,—since,
even if they had returned home, they would still have continued pris-
oners. The consent of the enemy who had captured them, or his total
subjugation, can alone dis-<395>charge them. But if they have only
promised not to effect their escape,—a promise which prisoners fre-
quently make in order to avoid the inconveniences of a jail,—the only
obligation incumbent on them, is, that they shall not, of themselves,
§210. Of
those who
cannot return
by the right of
postliminium.
§211. They
enjoy this right
when retaken.


chapter xiv
607
quit the enemy’s country, or the place assigned for their residence. And
if the troops of their party should gain possession of the place where
they reside, the consequence is, that, by the right of war, they recover
their liberty, are restored to their own nation, and reinstated in their
former condition.
When a town, reduced by the enemy’s arms, is retaken by those of
her own sovereign, she is, as we have above seen, restored to her former
condition, and reinstated in the possession of all her rights. It is asked
whether she thus recovers such part of her propertyashadbeenalienated
by the enemy while he kept her in subjection. In the ﬁrst place we are
to make a distinction between movable property not recoverable by the
right of postliminium (§202), and immovables. The former belongs to
the enemy who gets it into his hands, and he may irrecoverably alienate
it. As to immovables, let it be remembered that the acquisition of atown
taken in war is not fully consummated, till conﬁrmed by a treaty of
peace, or by the entire submission or destruction of the state to which
it belonged (§197). Till then, the sovereign of that town has hopes of
retaking it, or of recovering it by a peace. And from the moment it re-
turns into his power, he restores it to all its rights (§205), and conse-
quently it recovers all its possessions, as far as in their nature they are
recoverable. It therefore resumes its immovable possessions from the
hands of those persons who have been so prematurely forward to pur-
chase them. In buying them of one who had not an absolute right to
dispose of them, the purchasers made a hazardous bargain; and if they
prove losers by the transaction, it is a consequence to which they delib-
erately exposed themselves. But if that town had been ceded to the en-
emy by a treaty of peace, or was completely fallen into his power by the
submission of the whole state, she has no longer any claim to the right
of postliminium; and the alienation of any of her possessions by the
conqueror is valid and irreversible; nor can she lay claim to them, if, in
the sequel, some fortunate revolution should liberate her from the yoke
of the conqueror. When Alexander made a present to the Thessalians
of the sum due from them to the Thebans (see §77), he was so absolutely
master of the republic of Thebes, that he destroyed the city, and sold
the inhabitants.
The same decisions hold good with regard to the immovableproperty
§212. Whether
this right ex-
tends to their
property alien-
ated by the
enemy.


608
book iii: of war
of individuals, prisoners or not, which has been alienated by the enemy
while he was master of the country. Grotius proposes the question with
respect to immovable property possessed in a neutral country by a pris-
oner of war.* But, according to the principles we have laid down, this
question is <396> groundless: for the sovereign who makes a prisoner
in war, has no other right over him than that of detaining his person
until the conclusion of the war, or until he be ransomed (§§148, &c.);
but he acquires no right to the prisoner’s property, unless he can seize
on it. It is impossible to produce any natural reason why the captor
should have a right to dispose of his prisoner’s property, unless the pris-
oner has it about him.
When a nation, a people, a state, has been entirely subdued, it isasked
whether a revolution can entitle them to the right of postliminium. In
order justly to answer this question, there must again be a distinction of
cases. If that conquered state has not yet acquiesced in her new subjec-
tion, has not voluntarily submitted, and has only ceased to resist from
inability,—if her victor has not laid aside the sword of conquest and
taken up the sceptre of peace and equity,—such a people are not really
subdued: they are only defeated and oppressed; and, on being delivered
by the arms of an ally, they doubtless return to their former situation
(§207). Their ally cannot become their conqueror; he is their deliverer;
and all the obligation of the party delivered is to reward him. If the
subsequent conqueror, not being an ally to the state of which we speak,
intends to keep it under his own jurisdiction as the reward of his victory,
he puts himself in the place of the former conqueror, and becomes the
enemy of thestatewhichtheotherhadoppressed:thatstatemaylawfully
resist him, and avail herself of a favourable opportunity to recover her
liberty. If she had been unjustly oppressed, he who rescues her from the
yoke of the oppressor ought generously to reinstate her in the possession
of all her rights (§203).
The question changes with regard to a state which has voluntarily
submitted to the conqueror. If the people, no longer treated as enemies
but as actual subjects, have submitted to a lawful government, they are
* Lib. iii. cap. 9, §6 [[Law of War and Peace]].
§213. Whether
a nation that
has been en-
tirely subdued
can enjoy the
right of post-
liminium.


chapter xiv
609
thenceforward dependent on a new sovereign; or, being incorporated
with the victorious nation, they become a part of it, and share its fate.
Their former state is absolutely destroyed; allitsrelations,allitsalliances,
are extinguished (Book II. §203). Whoever then the new conquerormay
be, that afterwards subdues the state to which these people are united,
they share the destiny of that state, as a part shares the fate of the whole.
This has been the practice of nations in all ages,—I say, even of just and
equitable nations,—especially with regard to an ancient conquest. The
most moderate conqueror conﬁnes his generosity in this particular to
the restoration of the liberties of a people who have been but recently
subdued, and whom he does not consider as perfectly incorporated, or
well cemented by inclination, with the state which he has conquered.
If the people in question shake off the yoke and recover their liberty
by their own exertions, they regain all their rights; they return to their
former situation; and foreignnationshavenorighttodeterminewhether
they have shaken off the yoke of lawful authority, or burst the chains of
slavery. Thus, the <397> kingdom of Portugal,—which had been seized
on by Philip II.61 king of Spain, under pretence of an hereditary right,
but in reality by force and the terror of his arms,—re-established the
independency of her crown, and recovered her former rights, when she
drove out the Spaniards, and placed the duke of Braganza62 on the
throne.
Provinces, towns, and lands, which the enemy restores by the treaty
of peace, are certainly entitled to the right of postliminium: for the sov-
ereign, in whatever manner he recovers them, is bound to restore them
to their former condition, as soon as he regains possession of them
(§205). The enemy, in giving back a town at the peace, renounces the
right he had acquired by arms. It is just the same as if he had never taken
it; and thetransactionfurnishesnoreasonwhichcanjustifythesovereign
in refusing to reinstate such town in the possession of all her rights, and
restore her to her former condition.
61. In 1580.
62. John IV of Portugal, r. 1640–56.
§214. Right of
postliminium
for what is
restored at
the peace;


610
book iii: of war
But whatever is ceded to the enemy by a treaty of peace, is truly and
completely alienated. It has no longer any claim to the right of post-
liminium, unless the treaty of peace be broken and cancelled.
And as things not mentioned in the treaty of peace remain in the
condition in which they happen to be at the time when the treaty is
concluded, and are, on both sides, tacitly ceded to the present possessor,
it may be said in general, that the right of postliminium no longer exists
after the conclusion of the peace. That right entirely relates to the state
of war.
Nevertheless, and forthisveryreason,thereisanexceptiontobemade
here in favour of prisoners of war. Their sovereign is bound to release
them at the peace (§154). But if he cannot accomplish this,—if the fate
of war compels him to accept of hard and unjust conditions,—the en-
emy, who ought to set the prisoners at liberty when the war is terminated
and he has no longer any thing to fear from them (§§150, 153), continues
the state of war with respect to them, if he still detains them in captivity,
and especially if he reduces them to slavery (§152). They have therefore
a right to effect their escape from him if they have an opportunity, and
to return to their own country, equally as in war time; since, with regard
to them, the war still continues. And in that case, the sovereign, from
his obligation to protect them, is bound to restore them to their former
condition (§205).
Further, those prisoners who are, without any lawful reason,detained
after the conclusion of peace, become immediately free, when, once es-
caped from captivity, they have even reached a neutral country: for en-
emies are not to be pursued and seized on neutral ground (§132); and
whoever detains an innocent prisoner after the peace, continues to be
his enemy. This rule should and actually does obtainamongnationswho
do not admit and authorise the practice of enslaving prisoners of war.
<398>
It is sufﬁciently evident from the premisses, that prisoners are to be
considered as citizens who may one day return to their country: and,
when they do return, it is the duty of the sovereign to re-establish them
in their former condition. Hence it clearly follows, that the rights of
every one of those prisoners, together with his obligations (or the rights
§215. and for
things ceded
to the enemy.
§216. The
right of post-
liminium does
not exist after
a peace.
§217. Why
always in force
for prisoners.
§218. They
are free even
by escaping
into a neutral
country.
§219. How
the rights and
obligations
of prisoners
subsist.


chapter xiv
611
of others over him), still subsist undiminished,—only the exertion of
them is, for the most part, suspended during the time of his captivity.
The prisonerof war thereforeretainsarighttodisposeof hisproperty,
particularly in case of death: and as there is nothing in the state of cap-
tivity which can in this latter respect deprive him of the exercise of his
right, the testament of a prisoner of war ought to be valid in his own
country, unless rendered void by some inherent defect.
With nations which have established the indissolubility of the mar-
riage ties, or have ordained that they should continue for life unless dis-
solved by the judgment of a court, those ties still subsist, notwithstand-
ing the captivity of one of the parties, who, on his return home, is, by
postliminium, again entitled to all his matrimonial rights.
We do not here enter into a detail of what the civil laws of particular
nations have ordained with respect to therightof postliminium:wecon-
tent ourselves with observing that such local regulations are obligatory
on the subjects of the state alone, and do not affect foreigners. Neither
do we here examine what has been settled on that head by treaties: those
particular compacts establish merely a conventional right, which relates
only to the contractingparties. Customsconﬁrmedbylongandconstant
use are obligatory on those nations who have given a tacit consent to
them; and they are to be respected, when not contrary to the law of
nature: but those which involve an infringement of that sacred law are
faulty and invalid; and, instead of conforming to such customs, every
nation is bound to use her endeavours to effect their abolition. Among
the Romans the right of postliminium was in force, even in times of
profound peace, with respect to nations with which Rome had neither
connections of friendship, rights of hospitality, nor alliance.* This was
because those nations were, as we have already observed, considered in
some measure as enemies. The prevalence of milder manners has almost
every-where abolished that remnant of barbarism. <399>
* [[Justinian’s]] Digest. lib. xlix. de Capt. et Postlim. leg. v. §2.
§220. Testa-
ment of a pris-
oner of war.
§221.
Marriage.
§222. Regula-
tions respecting
postliminium,
established
by treaty or
custom.

612
book iii: of war
chapter xv
Of the Right of private Persons in War.
The right of making war, as we have shewn in the ﬁrst chapter of this
book, solely belongs to the sovereign power, which not only decides
whether it be proper to undertake the war, and to declare it, but likewise
directs all its operations, as circumstances of the utmost importance to
the safety of the state. Subjects, therefore, cannot, of themselves, take
any steps in this affair; nor aretheyallowedtocommitanyactof hostility
without orders from their sovereign. Be it understood, however, that,
under the head of “hostilities,” we do not here mean to include self-
defence. A subject may repel the violence of a fellow-citizen when the
magistrate’s assistance is not at hand; and with much greater reasonmay
he defend himself against the unexpected attacks of foreigners.
The sovereign’s order, which commands acts of hostility and gives a
right to commit them, is either general or particular. The declaration of
war, which enjoins the subjects at large to attack the enemy’s subjects,
implies a general order. The generals, ofﬁcers, soldiers, privateersmen,
and partisans, being all commissioned by the sovereign, make war by
virtue of a particular order.
But, though an order from the sovereign be necessary to authorisethe
subjects to make war, that necessity wholly results from thelawsessential
to every political society, and not from any obligation relative to the
enemy. For, when one nation takes up arms against another, she from
that moment declares herself anenemytoalltheindividualsof thelatter,
and authorises them to treat her as such. What right could she have in
that case to complain of any acts of hostility committed against her by
private persons without orders from their superiors? The rule, therefore,
of which we here speak, relates rather to public law in general, than to
the law of nations properly socalled,ortotheprinciplesof thereciprocal
obligations of nations.
If we conﬁne our view to the law of nations, considered in itself,—
when once two nations are engaged in war, all the subjects of the one
may commit hostilities against those of the other, and do them all the
§223. Subjects
cannot commit
hostilities
without the
sovereign’s
order.
§224. That
order may be
general or
particular.
§225. Source
of the neces-
sity of such an
order.
§226. Why the
law of nations
should have
adopted this rule.


chapter xv
613
mischief authorised by the state of war. But should two nations thus
encounter each other with the collective weight of their whole force,the
war would become much more bloody and destructive,andcouldhardly
be terminated otherwise than by the utter extinction of one of the par-
ties. The examples of ancient wars abundantly prove the truth of this
assertion to any man who will for a moment recall to mind the ﬁrst wars
waged by Rome against the popular republics by which <400> she was
surrounded. It is therefore with good reason that the contrary practice
has grown intoacustom withthenationsof Europe,—atleastwiththose
that keep up regular standing armies or bodies of militia. The troops
alone carry on the war, while the rest of the nation remain in peace. And
the necessity of a special order to act is so thoroughly established, that,
even after a declaration of war between two nations, if the peasants of
themselves commit any hostilities, the enemy shews them no mercy, but
hangs them up as he would so many robbers or banditti. The crews of
private ships of war stand in the same predicament: a commission from
their sovereign or admiral can alone, in case they are captured, insure
them such treatment as is given to prisoners taken in regular warfare.
In declarations of war, however, the ancient form is still retained, by
which the subjects in general are ordered, not only to break off all in-
tercourse with the enemy, but also to attack him. Custom interpretsthis
general order. It authorises, indeed, and even obliges every subject, of
whatever rank, to secure the persons and things belonging to the enemy,
when they fall into his hands; but it does not invite the subjects to un-
dertake any offensive expedition without a commission or particular
order.
There are occasions, however, when the subjects may reasonably sup-
pose the sovereign’s will, and act in consequence of his tacit command.
Thus, although the operations of war are by custom generally conﬁned
to the troops, if the inhabitants of a strong place, taken by the enemy,
have not promised or sworn submission to him, and should ﬁnd a fa-
vourable opportunity of surprising the garrison and recoveringtheplace
for their sovereign, they may conﬁdently presume that the prince will
approve of this spirited enterprise. And where is the man that shall dare
to censure it? It is true, indeed, that, if the townsmen miscarry in the
§227. Precise
meaning of
the order.
§228. What
private persons
may undertake,
presuming on
the sovereign’s
will.


614
book iii: of war
attempt, they will experience very severe treatment from the enemy. But
this does not prove the enterprise to be unjust, or contrary to the laws
of war. The enemy makes use of his right, of the right of arms, which
authorises him to call in the aid of terror to a certain degree, in order
that the subjects of the sovereign with whom he is at war may not be
willingtoventureonsuchboldundertakings,thesuccessof whichmight
prove fatal to him. During the last war, the inhabitants of Genoa sud-
denly took up arms of their own accord, and drove the Austrians from
the city:63 and the republic celebrates an annual commemorationof that
event by which she recovered her liberty.
Persons ﬁtting out private ships to cruise against the enemy acquire
the property of whatever captures theymake,asacompensationfortheir
disbursements, and for the risques they run: but they acquire it by grant
from the sovereign, who issues out commissions to them. The sovereign
allows them either the <401> whole or a part of the capture: thisentirely
depends on the nature of the contract he has made with them.
As the subjects are not under an obligation of scrupulously weighing
the justice of the war, which indeed they have not always anopportunity
of being thoroughly acquainted with, and respecting which, they are
bound, in case of doubt, to rely on the sovereign’s judgment (§187),—
they unquestionably may with a safe conscience serve their country by
ﬁtting out privateers, unless the war be evidently unjust. But, on the
other hand, it is an infamous proceeding on the part of foreigners, to
take out commissions from a prince, in order to commit piratical dep-
redations on a nation which is perfectly innocent with respect to them.
The thirst of gold is their only inducement; nor can the commission
they have received efface the infamy of their conduct, though it screens
them from punishment. Those alone are excusable, who thus assist a
nation whose cause is undoubtedly just, and that has taken up arms with
no other view than that of defending herself from oppression. They
would even deserve praise for their exertions insuchacause,if thehatred
of oppression, and the love of justice, rather than the desire of riches,
63. December 5–11, 1767.
§229.
Privateers.


chapter xv
615
stimulated them to generous efforts, and induced them to expose their
lives or fortunes to the hazards of war.
The noble view of gaining instruction in the art of war, and thus
acquiring a greater degree of ability to render useful services to their
country, has introduced the custom of serving as volunteers even in for-
eign armies; and the practice is undoubtedly justiﬁed by the sublimity
of the motive. At present, volunteers, when taken by the enemy, are
treated as if they belonged to the army in which they ﬁght. Nothingcan
be more reasonable: they in fact join that army, and unite with it in
supporting the same cause; and it makes little difference in the case,
whether they do this in compliance with any obligation, or at the spon-
taneous impulse of their own free choice.
Soldiers can undertake nothing withouttheexpressortacitcommand
of their ofﬁcers. To obey and execute, is their province,—not to act at
their own discretion: they are only instruments in the hands of their
commanders. Let it be remembered here, that, by a tacit order, I mean
one which is necessarily included in an express order, or in the functions
with which a person is intrusted by his superior. What is said of soldiers
must also in a proper degree be understood of ofﬁcers, and of all who
have any subordinate command. Wherefore, with respect to things
which are not intrusted to their charge, they may both be considered as
private individuals, who are not to undertake any thing without orders.
The obligation of the military is even more strict, as the martial law
expressly forbids acting without orders; and this disciplineissonecessary
that it scarcely leaves any room for presumption. In war, an enterprise
which wears a very advantageous appearance, and promises almost cer-
tain <402> success, may nevertheless be attended with fatal conse-
quences. It would be dangerous, in such a case, to leave the decision to
the judgment of men in subordinate stations, who are not acquainted
with all the views of their general, and who do not possess an equal
degree of knowledge and experience: it is therefore not to be presumed
that he intends to let them act at their own discretion. Fighting without
orders is almostalwaysconsidered,inamilitaryman,asﬁghtingcontrary
to orders, or contrary to prohibition. There is, therefore, hardly any case
except that of self-defence,inwhichthesoldiersandinferiorofﬁcersmay
§230.
Volunteers.
§231. What
soldiers and
subalterns
may do.


616
book iii: of war
act without orders. In that one case, the orders may safely be presumed;
or rather, the right of self-defence naturally belongs to every one, and
requires no permission. During the siege of Prague, in the last war,64 a
party of French grenadiers made a sally without orders and without of-
ﬁcers,—possessed themselves of a battery, spiked a part of the cannon,
and brought away the remainder into the city. The Roman severity
would have punished those men with death. The famous example of the
consul Manlius is well known, who, notwithstanding the victorygained
by his son, caused capital punishment to be inﬂicted on him for having
engaged the enemy without orders.* But the difference of times and
manners obliges a general to moderate such severity. The mareschal Bel-
lisle65 publicly reprimanded those brave grenadiers, but secretly caused
money to be distributed among them, as a reward of their courage and
alacrity. At another famous siege in the same war, that of Coni,66 the
private men of some batallions that were stationed in the fosse´s, made,
of their own accord, duringtheabsenceof theirofﬁcers,avigoroussortie
which was attended with success. Baron Leutrum67 was obliged to par-
don their transgression, lest he should damp an ardour on which the
safety of the place entirely depended. Such inordinate impetuosity
should nevertheless be checked as far as possible; since it may eventually
be productive of fatal consequences. Avidius Cassius inﬂicted capital
punishment on some ofﬁcers of his army, who had, without orders,
marched forth at the head of a handful of men, to surprise a body of
three thousand enemies, and had succeeded in cutting them to pieces.
This rigour he justiﬁed by saying that there might have been an am-
buscade,—dicens evenire potuisse ut essent insidiae, &c.†
* Tit. Liv. lib. viii. cap. 7.
† Volcatius Gallicanus, quoted by Grotius [[in Law of War and Peace]], book iii.
chap. 18, §1, note 6. [[“It might,” he said, “have been an ambush, and the barbarians’
awe for the Roman Empire might have been lost.” Avidius Cassius, Historia
Augusta IV.6.]]
64. Siege of Prague, 1741, during the War of the Austrian Succession.
65. Charles-Louis-Auguste Fouguet, Duc de Belle-Isle, 1684–1774, French soldier
and diplomat.
66. Siege of Coni (Cuneo), 1744.
67. Karl Sigismond Friedrick Wilhelm Leutrum.


chapter xv
617
Is the state bound to indemnify individuals for the damages theyhave
sustained in war? We may learn from Grotius that authors are divided
on this question.* The damages under consideration are to be distin-
guished into two kinds,—those done by the state itself or the sovereign,
and those done by the enemy. Of the ﬁrst kind, some are done delib-
erately and by way of precaution, as when a ﬁeld, a house, or a garden,
belonging to a private person, is taken for the purpose of erecting onthe
spot a town rampart, <403> or any other piece of fortiﬁcation,—or
when his standing corn or his store-houses aredestroyed,topreventtheir
being of use to the enemy. Such damages are to be made good to the
individual, who should bear only his quota of the loss. But there are
other damages, caused by inevitable necessity, as, for instance, the de-
struction caused by the artillery in retaking a town from the enemy.
These are merely accidents,—they are misfortunes which chance deals
out to the proprietors on whom they happen to fall. The sovereign, in-
deed, ought to shew an equitable regard for the sufferers, if the situation
of his affairs will admit of it: but no action lies against the state for
misfortunes of this nature,—for losses which she has occasioned, not
wilfully, but through necessity and by mere accident, in the exertion of
her rights. The same may be said of damages caused by the enemy. All
the subjects are exposed to such damages: and woe to him on whomthey
fall! The members of a society may well encounter such risk of property,
since they encounter a similar risk of life itself. Were the state strictly to
indemnify all those whose property is injured in this manner, the public
ﬁnances would soon be exhausted; and every individual in the state
would be obliged to contribute his share in due proportion,—a thing
utterly impracticable. Besides, these indemniﬁcations would be liable to
a thousand abuses, and there would be no end of the particulars. It is
therefore to be presumed that no such thing was ever intended by those
who united to form a society.
But it is perfectly consonant to the duties of the state and the sov-
ereign, and, of course, perfectly equitable, and even strictly just, to re-
lieve, as far as possible, those unhappy sufferers who have been ruined
* Lib. iii. cap. 20. §8 [[Law of War and Peace]].
§232. Whether
the state is
bound to in-
demnify the
subjects for
damages
sustained
in war.

618
book iii: of war
by the ravages of war, as likewise to take care of a family whose head
and support has lost his life in the service of the state. There are many
debts which are considered as sacred by the man who knows his duty,
although they do not afford any ground of action against him.* <404>
chapter xvi
Of various Conventions made during
the Course of the War.
War would become too cruel and destructive, were all intercourse be-
tween enemies absolutely broken off. According to the observation of
Grotius,† there still subsists a friendly intercourse in war, as Virgil‡ and
Tacitus§haveexpressedit.Theoccurrencesandeventsof warlayenemies
under the necessity of entering into various conventions. As we have
already treated in general of the observance of faith between enemies,
it is unnecessary for us in this place to prove the obligation of faithfully
acting up to those conventions made in war: it therefore only remains
* It is in general the indispensable duty of every sovereign to adopt the most ef-
ﬁcacious measures for the protection of his subjects engaged in war, in order thatthey
may suffer by it as little as possible,—instead of voluntarily exposing them to greater
evils. During the wars in the Netherlands, Philip the Second prohibited the release
or exchange of prisoners of war. He forbade the peasants, under pain of death, to
pay any contributions with a view to purchase an immunity from pillage and con-
ﬂagration; and, under the same penalty, prohibited the use of safe-guards and pro-
tections. In opposition to this barbarous ordinance, the states-general adopted mea-
sures fraught with consummate wisdom. They published an edict, in which, after
havingdescribedthedestructiveconsequencesof theSpanishbarbarity,theyexhorted
the Flemings to attend to their own preservation, and threatened to retaliate on all
who should obey the cruel ordinance of Philip. By such conduct they put an end to
the dreadful proceedings to which it had given birth. [[Note added in 1773/1797
editions.]]
† Lib iii. cap. xxi. §1 [[Law of War and Peace]].
‡ —— Belli commercia Turnus
Sustulit ista prior. Aen. x. 532.
[[“Such trafﬁcking in war Turnus ﬁrst put away.”]]
§ Ann. lib. xiv. cap. 33.
§233. Truce
and suspension
of arms.


chapter xvi
619
to explain the nature of them. Sometimes it is agreed to suspend hos-
tilities for a certain time; and if this convention be made but for a very
short period, or only regards some particular place, it is called a cessation
or suspension of arms. Such are those conventions made for thepurpose
of burying the dead after an assault or a battle, and for a parley, or a
conference between the generals of the hostile armies. If the agreement
be for a more considerable length of time, and especially if general, it is
more particularly distinguished by the appellation of a truce.Manypeo-
ple use both expressions indiscriminately.
The truce or suspension of arms does not terminate the war; it only
suspends its operations.
A truce is either partial or general. By the former, hostilities are sus-
pended only in certain places, as between a town and the army besieging
it. By the latter, they are to cease generally, and in all places, between the
belligerent powers. Partial truces may also admit of a distinction with
respect to acts of hostility, or to persons; that is to say, the parties may
agree to abstain from certain acts of hostility during a limited time, or
two armies may mutually conclude a truce or suspension of arms with-
out regard to any particular place.
A general truce, made for many years, differs from a peace in little
else than in leaving the question which was the original ground of the
war, still undecided. When two nations are weary of hostilities, and yet
cannot agree on the point which constitutes the subject of their dispute,
they generally have recourse to this kind of agreement. Thus, instead of
peace, long truces only have usually been made between the Christians
and the Turks,—sometimes from a false spiritof religion,atother<405>
times because neither party were willing to acknowledge the other as
lawful owners of their respective possessions.
It is necessary to the validity of an agreement, that it be made by one
who possesses competent powers. Every thing done in war is done by
the authority of the sovereign, who alone has the right both of under-
taking the war, and directing its operations (§4). But from the impos-
sibility of executing every thing by himself, he must necessarily com-
municate part of his power to his ministers and ofﬁcers. The question,
therefore, is, to determine what are the things of which the sovereign
reserves the management in his own hands, and what those are which
§234. Does
not terminate
the war.
§235. A truce
is either partial
or general.
§236. General
truce for
many years.
§237. By
whom these
agreements
may be
concluded.


620
book iii: of war
he is naturally presumed to intrust to the ministers of his will, to the
generals and other ofﬁcers employed in military operations. We have
above (Book II. §207) laid down and explained the principle which is to
serve as a general rule on this subject. If the sovereign has not given any
special mandate, the person commanding in his name is held to be in-
vested with all the powers necessary for the reasonable and salutary ex-
ercise of his functions,—for every thing which naturally follows from
his commission. Every thing beyond that is reserved to the sovereign,
who is not supposed to have delegated a greater portion of his power
than is necessary for the good of his affairs. According to this rule, a
general truce can only be concluded by the sovereign himself,orbysome
person on whom he has expressly conferred a power for that purpose.
For it is by no means necessary to the success of the war, that a general
should be invested with such an extensive authority: it would exceed the
limits of his functions, which consist in directingthemilitaryoperations
in the place where he has the command, and notinregulatingthegeneral
interests of the state. The conclusion of a general truce is a matter of so
high importance, that the sovereign is always presumed to have reserved
it in his own hands. So extensive a power suits only the viceroy or gov-
ernor of a distant country, for the territories under him: and even in this
case, if the truce be for a number of years, it is natural to suppose the
sovereign’s ratiﬁcation necessary. The Roman consuls and other com-
manders had a power to grant general truces for the term of their com-
mission; but if that term was considerable, or the truce made fora longer
time, it required the ratiﬁcation of the senate and people. Even a partial
truce, when for a long time, seems also to exceed the ordinary powers
of a general; and he can only conclude it under a reservation of its being
ratiﬁed by the sovereign authority.
But, as to partial truces for a short period, it is often necessary, and
almost always proper, that the general should have a power to conclude
them:—it is necessary, when he cannot wait for the sovereign’s consent:
it is proper, on those occasions when the truce can only tend to spare the
effusion of blood, and to promote the mutual advantage of the con-
tracting parties. With such a power, therefore,thegeneralorcommander
in <406> chief is naturally supposed to be invested. Thus, the governor


chapter xvi
621
of a town, and the general besieging it, may agree on a cessation of arms,
for the purpose of burying the dead, or of coming to a parley: they may
even settle a truce for some months, on condition that the town, if not
relieved within that time, shall surrender, &c. Conventions of this kind
only tend to mitigate the evils of war, and are not likely to prove det-
rimental to any one.
All these truces and suspensions of arms are concluded by the au-
thority of the sovereign, who consents to some of them in his own per-
son, and to others through the ministry of his generals and ofﬁcers. His
faith is pledged by such agreements, and he is bound to enforce their
observance.
The truce binds the contracting parties from the moment of its being
concluded, but cannot have the force of a law with regard to the subjects
on both sides, till it has been solemnly proclaimed: and as an unknown
law imposes no obligation, the truce does not become binding on the
subjects, until duly notiﬁed to them. Hence, if, before they can have
obtained certain information of its being concluded, they commit any
act contrary to it,—any act of hostility,—they are not punishable. But
as the sovereign is bound to fulﬁl his promises, it is incumbent on him
to cause restitution to be made of all prizes taken subsequent to the pe-
riod when the truce should have commenced. The subjectswhothrough
ignorance of its existence have failed to observe it, are not obliged to
offer an indemniﬁcation, any more than their sovereign who was unable
to notify it to them sooner: the non-observance of the truce in this case
is merely an accident, not imputable to any fault on his part or on theirs.
A ship being out at sea at the time when the truce is published, meets
with a ship belonging to the enemy, and sinks her: as there is no guilt in
this case, she is not liable to pay any damage. If she has made a capture
of the vessel, all the obligation she lies under is to restore the prize, as
she must not retain it in violation of the truce. But those who should,
through their own fault, remain ignorant of thepublicationof thetruce,
would be bound to repair any damage they had caused contrary to its
tenor. The simple commission of a fault, and especially of a slight one,
may to a certain degree be suffered to pass with impunity;anditcertainly
does not deserve to be punished with equal severity as a premeditated
§238. The
sovereign’s
faith engaged
in them.
§239. When
the truce
begins to be
obligatory.


622
book iii: of war
transgression: but it furnishes no plea against the obligation to repairthe
damages accruing. In order, as far as possible, to obviate every difﬁculty,
it is usual with sovereigns, in their truces as well as in their treaties of
peace, to assign different periods for the cessation of hostilities, accord-
ing to the situation and distance of places.
Since a truce cannot be obligatory on the subjects unless known to
them, it must be solemnly published in all the places where it is intended
that it should be observed.
If any of the subjects, whethermilitarymenorprivatecitizens,offend
against the truce, this is no violation of the public <407> faith; nor is
the truce thereby broken. But the delinquents should be compelled to
make ample compensation for the damage, and severely punished.
Should their sovereign refuse to do justice on the complaintsof theparty
injured, he thereby becomes accessory to the trespass, and violates the
truce.
Now, if one of the contracting parties, or any person by his order, or
even with his simple consent, commits any act contrary to the truce, it
is an injury to the other contracting party: the truce is dissolved; and the
injured party is entitled immediately to take up arms, not only for the
purpose of renewing the operations of the war, but also of avenging
the recent injury offered to him.
Sometimes a penalty on the infractor of the truce is reciprocally stip-
ulated: and then the truce is not immediately broken on the ﬁrst in-
fraction. If the party offending submits to the penalty, and repairs the
damage, the truce still subsists, and the offended party has nothing far-
ther to claim. But if an alternative has been agreed on, viz. that in case
of an infraction the delinquent shall suffer a certain penalty, or the truce
shall be broken, it is the injured party who has the choice of insisting
onthepenaltyortakingadvantageof hisrighttorecommencehostilities:
for if this were left at the option of the infractor, the stipulation of the
alternative would be nugatory, since, by refusingtosubmittothepenalty
simply stipulated, he would break the compact, and thereby give the
injured party a right to take up arms again. Besides, in cautionaryclauses
of this kind, the alternative is not supposed to be introduced in favour
of him who fails in his engagements; and it would be absurd to suppose
§240. Publica-
tion of the
truce.
§241. Subjects
contravening
the truce.
§242. Viola-
tion of the
truce.
§243. Stipu-
lation of a
penalty against
the infractor.


chapter xvi
623
that he reserves to himself the advantage of breaking them by his in-
fraction rather than undergo the penalty. He might as well break them
at once openly. The only object of the penal clause is to secure the truce
from being so easily broken; and there can be no other reason for intro-
ducing it with an alternative, than that of leaving to the injured party a
right, if he thinks ﬁt, to dissolve a compact from which the behaviour
of the enemy shews him he has little security to expect.
It is necessary that the time of the truce be accurately speciﬁed, in
order to prevent all doubt or dispute respecting the period of its com-
mencement, and that of its expiration. The French language, extremely
clear and precise for those who know how to use it with propriety, fur-
nishes expressions which bid deﬁance to the most subtle chicanery. The
words “inclusively” and “exclusively” banish all ambiguity which may
happen to be in the convention, with regard to the two terms of the
truce, its beginning and end. For instance, if it be said that “the truce
shall last from the ﬁrst of March inclusively, until the ﬁfteenth of April,
also inclusively,” there can remain no doubt; whereas, if the words had
simply been, “from the ﬁrst of March until the ﬁfteenth of April,” it
might be disputed whether those two days, mentioned as the initial and
ﬁnal terms of the truce, were com-<408>prehended in the treaty,ornot:
and indeed authors are divided on this question. As to the former of
those two days, it seems beyond all questiontobecomprisedinthetruce:
for if it be agreed that there shall be a truce from the ﬁrst of March, this
naturally means that hostilities shall cease on the ﬁrst of March. As to
the latter day, there is somethingmoreof doubt,—theexpression“until”
seeming to separate it from the time of the armistice. However, as we
often say “until such a day inclusively,” the word “until” is notnecessarily
exclusive, according to the genius of the language, And as a truce, which
spares the effusion of human blood, is no doubt a thing of a favourable
nature, perhaps the safest way is to include in it the very day of the term.
Circumstances may also help to ascertain the meaning: but it is very
wrong not to remove all ambiguity, when it may be done by the addition
of a single word.
In national compacts, the word “day” is to be understood of a natural
day, since it is in this meaning that a day is the common measure of time
§244. Time
of the truce.

624
book iii: of war
among nations. The computation by civil days owes its origin tothecivil
law of each nation, and varies in different countries. The natural day
begins at sun-rise, and lasts twenty-four hours, or one diurnalrevolution
of the sun. If, therefore, a truce of a hundred days be agreed on, to begin
on the ﬁrst of March, the truce begins at sun-rise on the ﬁrst of March,
and is to continue a hundred days of twenty-four hours each. But as the
sun does not rise at the same hour throughoutthewholeyear,theparties,
in order to avoid an overstrained nicety, and a degree of chicane unbe-
coming that candour which should prevail in conventions of this kind,
ought certainly to understand that the truce expires, as it began, at the
rising of the sun. The term of a day is meant from one sun to the other,
without quibbling or disputing about the difference of a few minutes in
the time of his rising. He who, having made a truce for a hundred days,
beginning on the twenty-ﬁrst of June, when the sun rises about four
o’clock, should, on the day the truce is to end, take up arms at the same
hour, and surprise his enemy before sun-rise, would certainly be consid-
ered as guilty of a mean and perﬁdious chicanery.
If no term has been speciﬁed for the commencement of the truce,
the contracting parties, being bound by it immediately on its conclusion
(§239), ought to have it published without delay, in order that it may be
punctually observed: for it becomes binding on the subjects only from
the time when it is duly published with respect to them (ibid.); and it
begins to take effect only from the moment of the ﬁrst publication, un-
less otherwise settled by the terms of the agreement.
The general effect of a truce is that every act of hostility shall abso-
lutely cease. And in order to obviate all dispute respecting the acts which
may be termed hostile, the general rule is, that, during the truce, each
party may, within his own territories, and in the places where he is mas-
ter, do whatever he would have <409> a right to do in time of profound
peace. Thus a truce does not deprive a sovereign of the liberty of levying
soldiers, assembling an army in his own dominions, marching troops
within the country, and even calling in auxiliaries, or repairing the for-
tiﬁcations of a town which is not actually besieged. As he has a right to
do all these things in time of peace, the truce does not tie up his hands.
Can it be supposed that by such a compact he meant to debar himself
§245. Effects
of a truce;
what is
allowed, or
not, during its
continuance.
1st Rule. Each
party may do
at home what
they have a
right to do in
time of peace.


chapter xvi
625
from executing things which the continuation of hostilities could not
prevent him from doing?
But to take advantage of the cessation of arms in order to execute
without danger certain things which are prejudicial to the enemy, and
which could not have been safely undertaken during the continuanceof
hostilities, is circumventing and deceiving the enemy with whom the
compact has been made: it is a breach of the truce. Bythissecondgeneral
rule we may solve several particular cases.
The truce concluded between the governor of a town and the general
besieging it, deprives both of the liberty of continuingtheirworks.With
regard to the latter, this is manifest,—his works being acts of hostility.
But neither can the governor, on his part, avail himself of the armistice,
for the purpose of repairing the breaches or erecting new fortiﬁcations.
The artillery of the besiegers does not allow him to carry on such works
with impunity during the continuance of hostilities: it would therefore
be detrimental to them that he should employ the truce in this manner;
and they are under no obligation of submitting to be so far imposed
upon: they will with good reason consider such an attempt as an infrac-
tion of the truce. But the suspension of arms does not hinder the gov-
ernor from continuing within his town such works as were not liable to
be impeded by the attacks or ﬁre of the enemy. At the last siege of Tour-
nay,68 after the surrender of the town, an armistice was agreedon;during
the continuance of which, the governor permitted the French to make
all the necessary preparations for attacking the citadel, to carry on their
works, and erect their batteries,—because the governor, on his part, was
in the mean time busily employed within, in clearing away the rubbish
with which the blowing up of a magazine had ﬁlled the citadel, and was
erecting batteries on the ramparts. But all this he might have performed
with little or no danger, even if the operations of the siege had com-
menced; whereas the French could not have carried on their works with
such expedition, or made their approaches and erected their batteries,
without losing a great number of men. There was therefore no equality
in the case; and, on that footing, the truce was entirely in favour of the
68. In 1745.
§246. 2d. Rule.
Not to take
advantage of
the truce in
doing what
hostilities
would have
prevented.
§247. For
instance, con-
tinuing the
works of a
siege, or
repairing
breaches;


626
book iii: of war
besiegers: and, in consequence of it, the capture of the citadeltookplace
sooner, probably, by a fortnight, than it would otherwisehavehappened.
If the truce be concluded either for the purpose of settling the terms
of the capitulation or of waiting for the orders of the <410> respective
sovereigns, the besieged governor cannot make use of it as a convenient
opportunity to introduce succours or ammunition into the town: for
this would be taking an undue advantage of thearmisticeforthepurpose
of deceiving the enemy;—a conduct which is inconsistent withcandour
and honesty. The spirit of such a compact evidently imports that all
things shall remain as they were at the moment of its conclusion.
But this is not to be extended to a suspension of arms agreed on for
some particular circumstance, as, for instance, burying the dead. In this
case, the truce is to be interpreted with a view to its immediate object.
Accordingly the ﬁring ceases, either in all quarters, or only in a single
point of attack, pursuant to agreement, that each party may freely carry
off their dead: and during this intermission of the cannonade, it is not
allowable to carry on any works which the ﬁring would have impeded.
This would be taking an undue advantage of the armistice, and conse-
quently a violation of it. But it is perfectly justiﬁable in the governor,
during such a cessation of hostilities, silently to introduce a reinforce-
ment in some quarter remote from the point of attack. If the besieger,
lulled by such an armistice, abates in his vigilance, he must abide the
consequences. The armistice of itself does not facilitate the entrance of
that reinforcement.
Likewise if an army in a bad position proposes and concludes an ar-
mistice for the purpose of burying the dead after a battle, it cannot pre-
tend, during the suspension of arms, to extricate itself from its disad-
vantageous situation, and to march off unmolested, in sight of the
enemy. This would be availing itself of the compact in order to effect a
purpose which it could not otherwise have accomplished. This would
be laying a snare: and conventions must not be converted into snares.
The enemy, therefore, may justly obstruct the motions of that army the
moment it attempts to quit its station: but if it silently ﬁles off in the
rear, and thus reaches a safer position, it will not be guilty of a breach
of faith; since nothing more is implied by a suspension of arms for the
§248. or
introducing
succours.
§249. Dis-
tinction of a
particular case.
§250. Retreat
of an army
during a sus-
pension of
hostilities.


book i: nations in themselves
The Germanic nations introduced another custom,—that of requir-
ing homage from a state either vanquished, or too weak to make resis-
tance. Sometimes even, a prince has given sovereignties in fee, and sov-
ereigns have voluntarily rendered themselves feudatories to others.
When the homage leaves independency and sovereign authority in
the administration of the state, and only means certain duties to thelord
of the fee, or even a mere honorary acknowledgment, itdoesnotprevent
the state or the feudatory prince being strictly sovereign. The king of
Naples pays homage for his kingdom to the pope, and is nevertheless
reckoned among the principal sovereigns of Europe.
Two sovereign states may also be subject to the same prince, without
any dependence on each other, and each may retain all its rights as a free
and sovereign state. The king of Prussia is sovereign prince of Neuf-
chatel in Switzerland, without that principality being in any manner
united to his otherdominions; sothatthepeopleof Neufchatel,invirtue
of their franchises, may serve a foreign power at war with the king of
Prussia, provided that the war be not on account of that principality.4
Finally, several sovereign and independent states may unite them-
selves together by a perpetual confederacy, without ceasing to be, each
individually, a perfect state. They will together constitute a federal re-
public: their joint deliberations will not impair the sovereignty of each
member, though they may, in certain respects, put some restraint on the
exercise of it, in virtue of voluntary engagements. A person does not
cease to be free and independent, when he is obliged to fulﬁl engage-
ments which he has voluntarily contracted.
Such were formerly the cities of Greece; such are at present5theSeven
United Provinces of the Netherlands, and such the members of theHel-
vetic body.
4. Although there is no known case of mercenaries from Neuchaˆtel ﬁghting
against Prussian forces, Vattel would have had in mind the battle of Novara (1500),
when Swiss troops employed by both France and the Italian states clashed. The event
acquired iconic status in Swiss historiography, and its ramiﬁcations were extensively
discussed by historians such as Wattenwyl.
5. 1758.
§8. Of feuda-
tory states.
§9. Of two
states subject
to the same
prince.
§10. Of states
forming a
federal
republic.


chapter ii
85
But a people that has passed under the dominion of another is no
longer a state, and can no longer availitself directlyof thelawof nations.
Such were the nations and kingdoms which the Romans rendered sub-
ject to their empire; the generality even of those whom they honoured
with the name of friends and allies no longer formed real states. Within
themselves, they were go-<4>verned by their own laws and magistrates;
but without, they were in every thing obliged to follow the orders of
Rome; they dared not of themselves either to make war or contract al-
liances; and could not treat with nations.
The law of nations is the law of sovereigns: free and independent
states are moral persons, whose rights and obligations we are to establish
in this treatise.
chapter ii
General Principles of the Duties of
a Nation towards itself.
If the rights of a nation spring from its obligations, it is principallyfrom
those that relate to itself. It will further appear that its duties towards
others depend very much on its duties towards itself, as the former are
to be regulated and measured by the latter. As we are then to treat of the
obligations and rights of nations,—an attention to order requires that
we should begin by establishing what each nation owes to itself.
The general and fundamental rule of our duties towards ourselves is,
that every moral being ought to live in a manner conformable to his
nature, naturae convenienter vivere. A nation is a being determined by
its essential attributes, that has its own nature, and can act in conformity
to it. There are then actions of a nation as such, wherein it is concerned
in its national character, and whichare eithersuitableoroppositetowhat
constitutes it a nation; so that it is not a matter of indifference whether
it performs some of those actions, and omits others. In this respect, the
Law of Nature prescribes it certain duties. We shall see, in this ﬁrstbook,
what conduct a nation ought to observe, in order that it may not be
§11. Of a state
that has passed
under the
dominion of
another.
§12. The
objects of
this treatise.
§13. A nation
ought to act
agreeably to
its nature.


86
book i: nations in themselves
wanting to itself. But we shall ﬁrst sketch out a general idea of this
subject.
He who no longer exists can have no duties to perform: and a moral
being is charged with obligations to himself, only with a view to his per-
fection and happiness: for to preserve and to perfect his own nature, is the
sum of all his duties to himself.
The preservation of a nation consists in the duration of the political
association by which it is formed. If a period is put to this association,
the nation or state no longer subsists, though the individuals that com-
posed it, still exist.
The perfection of a nation is found in what renders it capable of ob-
taining the end of civil society; and a nation is in a perfect state, when
nothing necessary is wanting to arrive at that end. We know that the
perfection of a thing consists, generally, in the perfect agreement of all
its constituent parts to tend to the same end. A nation being a multitude
of men united together in civil society,—if in thatmultitudeallconspire
to attain the end proposed in forming a civil society, thenationisperfect;
and it is more or less so, according as it approaches more or less <5> to
that perfect agreement. In the samemanneritsexternalstatewillbemore
or less perfect, according as it concurs with the interior perfection of the
nation.
The end or object of civil society is toprocureforthecitizenswhatever
they stand in need of, for the necessities, the conveniences, the accom-
modation of life, and, in general, whateverconstituteshappiness,—with
the peaceful possession of property, a method of obtaining justice with
security, and, ﬁnally a mutual defence against all external violence.
It is now easy to form a just idea of the perfection of a state or na-
tion:—every thing in it must conspire to promote the ends we have
pointed out.
In the act of association, by virtue of which a multitude of men form
together a state or nation, each individual has entered into engagements
with all, to promote the general welfare; and all have entered into en-
gagements with each individual, to facilitate for him the means of sup-
plying his necessities, and to protect and defend him. It is manifest that
these reciprocal engagements can no otherwise be fulﬁlledthanbymain-
§14. Of the
preservation
and perfection
of a nation.
§15. What
is the end of
civil society.
§16. A nation
is under an
obligation to
preserve itself.


chapter xvi
627
burial of the dead, than that neither party shall attack the other whilst
this ofﬁce of humanity is performing. The enemy, therefore, can only
blame his own remissness:—he ought to have stipulated, that, during
the cessation of hostilities, neither party should quit their post: or it was
his business vigilantly to watch the motions of the hostile army: and on
perceiving their design, he was at liberty to oppose it. It is a very justi-
ﬁable stratagem to propose a cessation of arms for a particular object,
with a view of lulling the enemy’s vigilance, and covering a design of
retreating.
But if the truce be notmade foranyparticularobjectalone,wecannot
honourably avail ourselves of it in order to gain an advantage, as, for
instance, to secure an important post, or to advance into the enemy’s
country. The latter step would indeed be a violation of the truce; for
every advance into the enemy’s country is an act of hostility. <411>
Now, as a truce suspends hostilities without putting an end to the
war, every thing must, during the continuance of the truce, be suffered
to remain in its existing state, in all places of which the possession is
contested: nor is it lawful, in such places, to attempt any thing to the
prejudice of the enemy. This is a third general rule.
When the enemy withdraws his troops from a place, and absolutely
quits it, his conduct sufﬁciently shews that he does not intend to occupy
it any longer: and inthis casewemaylawfullytakepossessionof itduring
the truce. But if by any indication it appears that a post, an open town,
or a village, is not relinquished by the enemy, and that, though he ne-
glects to keep it guarded, he still maintains his rights and claims to it,
the truce forbids us to seize upon it. To take away from the enemy what
he is disposed to retain, is an act of hostility.
It is also an undoubted act of hostility to receive towns or provinces
inclined to withdraw from the sovereignty of the enemy, and give them-
selves up to us. We thereforecannotreceivethemduringthecontinuance
of the truce, which wholly suspends all hostile proceedings.
Far more unlawful it is, during that period, to instigate the subjects
of the enemy to revolt, or to tamper with the ﬁdelity of his governors
and garrisons. These are not only hostile proceedings, but odious acts
of hostility (§180). As to deserters and fugitives, they may be received
§251. 3d. Rule
Nothing to be
attempted in
contested
places, but
every thing
to be left as
it was.
§252. Places
quitted or
neglected by
the enemy.
§253. Subjects
inclined to
revolt against
their prince
not to be re-
ceived during
the truce;
§254. much
less to be solic-
ited to treason.


628
book iii: of war
during the truce, since they are received even in time of peace, when
there is no treaty to the contrary. And even if such a treaty did exist, its
effect is annulled, or at least suspended, by the war which has sincetaken
place.
To seize persons or things belonging to the enemy, when he has not,
by any particular fault on his side, afforded us grounds for such seizure,
is an act of hostility, and consequently not allowable during a truce.
Since the right of postliminium is founded only on the state of war
(Chap. XIV. of this Book), it cannot take effect during the truce, which
suspends all the acts of war, and leaves every thing in its existing state
(§251). Even prisoners cannot during that season withdraw from the
power of the enemy, in order to recover their former condition: for the
enemy has a right to detain them while the war continues; and it is only
on its conclusion that his right over their liberty expires (§148).
During the truce, especially if made for a long period, it is naturally
allowable for enemies to pass and repass to and from each other’s coun-
try, in the same manner as it is allowed in time of peace; since all hos-
tilities are now suspended. But each of the sovereigns is at liberty, as he
would be in time of peace, to adopt every precaution which may be
necessary to prevent this intercourse from becoming prejudicial to him.
He has just grounds of suspicion against people with whom he is soon
to recommence hostilities. He may even declare, at the <412> time of
making the truce, that he will admit none of the enemy into any place
under his jurisdiction.
Those who, having entered the enemy’s territories during the truce,
are detained there by sickness or any other unsurmountable obstacle,
and thus happen to remain in the country after the expiration of the
armistice, may in strict justice be kept prisoners: it is an accident which
they might have foreseen, and to which they have of their own accord
exposed themselves; but humanity and generosity commonly require
that they should be allowed a sufﬁcient term for their departure.
If the articles of truce contain any conditions either more extensive
or more narrowly restrictive thanwhatwehaveherelaiddown,thetrans-
action becomes a particular convention. It is obligatory on the contract-
ing parties, who are bound to observe what they have promised in due
§255. Persons
or effects of
enemies not
to be seized
during the
truce.
§256. Right of
postliminium
during the
truce.
§257. Inter-
course allowed
during a truce.
§258. Persons
detained by
unsurmount-
able obstacles,
after the expi-
ration of the
truce.
§259. Partic-
ular conditions
added to
truces.


chapter xvi
629
form: and the obligations thence resulting constitute a conventional
right, the detail of which is foreign to the plan of this work.
As the truce only suspends the effects of war (§233), the moment it
expires, hostilities may be renewed without any fresh declaration of war:
for every one previously knows thatfrom thatinstantthewarwillresume
its course; and the reasons for the necessity of a declaration are not ap-
plicable to this case (§51).
But a truce of many years very much resembles a peace, and only
differs from it in leaving the subject of the war still undecided. Now as
a considerable lapse of time may have effected a material alteration in
the circumstances and dispositions of both the parties,—the love of
peace, so becoming in sovereigns, the care they should take to spare their
subjects’ blood, and even that of their enemies,—these dispositions, I
say, seem to require that princes should not take up arms again at the
expiration of a truce in which all military preparatives had been totally
laid aside and forgotten, without making some declaration which may
invite the enemy to prevent the effusion of blood. The Romans have
given us an example of this commendable moderation. They had only
made a truce with the city of Veii;69 and the enemy even renewed hos-
tilities before the stipulated time was elapsed. Nevertheless, at the ex-
piration of the term, the college of the feciales gave it as their opinion
that the Romans should send to make a formal demand of satisfaction,
previous to their taking up arms again.*
The capitulations on the surrender of towns are among the principal
conventions made between enemies during the course of war. They are
usually settled between the general of the besieging army and the gov-
ernor of the besieged town, both acting in virtue of the authority an-
nexed to their respective posts or commissions.
We have elsewhere (Book II. Chap. XIV.) laid down the principlesof
that authority which is vested in the subordinate <413> powers,together
with general rules to aid in forming a decision respecting it. All this has
recently been recapitulated in a few words, and particularly applied to
* Tit. Liv. lib. iv. cap. 30.
69. In 425 b.c.
§260. At the
expiration of
the truce, the
war is renewed
without any
fresh decla-
ration.
§261. Capitu-
lations and by
whom they
may be
concluded.

630
book iii: of war
generals and other military commanders in chief (§237). Since the gen-
eral of an army, and the governor of a town, must naturally be invested
with all the powers necessary for the exercise of their respective func-
tions, we have a right to presume that they possess those powers: and
that of concluding a capitulation is certainly one of the number, espe-
cially when they cannot wait for the sovereign’s order. A treaty made by
them on that subject is therefore valid, and binds the sovereigns, in
whose name and by whose authority the respective commanders have
acted.
But let it be observed, that, if those ofﬁcers do not mean to exceed
their powers, they should scrupulously conﬁne themselves within the
limits of their functions, and forbear to meddle with things which have
not been committed to their charge. In the attack and the defence, in
the capture or the surrender of a town, the possession alone is the point
in question, and not the property and right: the fate of the garrison is
also involved in the transaction. Accordingly, the commanders may
come to an agreement respecting the manner in which the capitulating
town shall be possessed: the besieging general may promise that the in-
habitants shall be spared, and permitted to enjoy their religion, fran-
chises, and privileges: and as to the garrison, he may allowthemtomarch
out with their arms and baggage, with all the honours of war,—to be
escorted and conducted to a place of safety, &c. The governor of the
town may deliver it up at discretion, if reduced to that extremity by the
situation of affairs: he may surrender himself and his garrison prisoners
of war, or engage, that, for a stipulated time, or even to the end of the
war,theyshallnotcarryarmsagainstthesameenemy,oragainsthisallies:
and the governor’s promise is valid and obligatory on all under his com-
mand, who are bound to obey him while he keeps within the limits of
his functions (§23).
But should the besieging general take on him to promise that his sov-
ereign shall never annex the conquered town to his own dominions, or
shall, after a certain time, be obliged to restore it, he would exceed the
bounds of his authority, in entering into a contract respecting matters
which are not intrusted to his management. And the like may be said of
a governor who in the capitulation should proceed to such lengths as for
§262. Clauses
contained in
them.
chapter xvi
631
ever to alienate the town which he commands, and to deprive his sov-
ereign of the right to retake it,—or who should promise that hisgarrison
shall never carry arms, not even in another war. His functions do not
give him so extensive a power. If, therefore, in the conferences for a ca-
pitulation, either of the hostile commanders should insist on conditions
which the other does not think himself empowered to grant, they have
still one expedient left, which is to agree to an armistice, during which
every thing <414> shall continue in its present state, until they have re-
ceived orders from higher authority.
At the beginning of this chapter we have given the reasons why we
thought it unnecessary to prove in this place that all these conventions
made during the course of the war, are to be inviolably adhered to. We
shall therefore only observe, with respect to capitulations in particular,
that, as it is unjust and scandalous to violate them, so the consequences
of such an act of perﬁdy often prove detrimental to the party who has
been guilty of it. What conﬁdence can thenceforward be placed in him?
The towns which he attacks will endure the most dreadful extremities,
rather than place any dependence on his word. He strengthens his en-
emies by compelling them to make a desperate defence; and every siege
that he is obliged to undertake, will become terrible. On the contrary,
ﬁdelity attracts conﬁdence and affection; it facilitates enterprises, re-
moves obstacles, and paves the way to glorious successes. Of this history
furnishes us a ﬁne example in the conduct of George Baste, general of
the imperialists in 1602, against Battory and the Turks. The insurgents
of Battory’s party having gained possession of Bistrith, otherwise called
Nissa, Baste recovered the town by a capitulation, which in his absence
was violated by some German soldiers: but being informed of the trans-
action on his return, he immediately hanged up all the soldiers con-
cerned, and out of his own purse paid the inhabitants all the damages
they had sustained. This action had so powerful an inﬂuence on the
minds of the rebels, that they all submitted to the emperor, without
demanding any other surety than the word of general Baste.*
* Sully’s Memoirs, by M. de l’Ecluse, vol. iv. p. 179.
§263. Obser-
vance of capit-
ulations, and
its utility.


632
book iii: of war
Individuals, whetherbelongingtothearmyornot,whohappensingly
tofall in with theenemy,are,bytheurgentnecessityof thecircumstance,
left to their own discretion, and may, so far as concerns their own per-
sons, do every thing which a commander might do with respect to him-
self and the troops under his command. If, therefore, in consequenceof
the situation in which they are involved, they make any promise, such
promise (provided it do not extend to matters which can neverliewithin
the sphere of a private individual) is valid and obligatory, as being made
with competent powers. For when a subject can neither receive his sov-
ereign’s orders nor enjoy his protection, he resumes his natural rights,
and is to provide for his own safety by any just and honourable means
in his power. Hence, if that individual has promised a sum for his ran-
som, the sovereign, so far from having a power to discharge him from
his promise, should oblige him to fulﬁl it. The good of the state requires
that faith should be kept on such occasions, and that subjects should
have this mode of saving their lives or recovering their liberty. <415>
Thus a prisoner who is released on his parole, is bound to observe it
with scrupulous punctuality; nor hasthesovereignarighttoopposesuch
observance of his engagement: for, had not the prisoner thus given his
parole, he would not have been released.
Thus also the country people, the inhabitants of villages or defence-
less towns, are bound to pay the contributionswhichtheyhavepromised
in order to save themselves from pillage.
Nay more, a subject would even have a right to renounce his country,
if the enemy, being master of his person, refused to spare his life on any
other condition: for, when once the society to whichhebelongsisunable
to protect and defend him, he resumes his natural rights. And besides,
should he obstinately refuse compliance, what advantagewouldthestate
derive from his death? Undoubtedly, while any hope remains, while we
have yet any means of serving our country, it is our duty to expose our-
selves and to brave every danger for her sake. I here suppose that we have
no alternative but that of renouncing our country or perishing without
any advantage to her. If by our death we can serve her, it is noble to
imitate the heroic generosity of the Decii. But an engagement to serve
against our country, were it even the only means of saving our life, is
§264. Prom-
ises made to
the enemy by
individuals.


chapter xvii
633
dishonourable; and a man of spirit would submit to a thousand deaths,
rather than make so disgraceful a promise.
If a soldier, meeting an enemy in a by-place, makes him prisoner, but
promises him his life or liberty on condition of his paying a certain ran-
som, this agreement is to be respected by the superiors: for it does not
appear that the soldier, left entirely to himself on that occasion, has in
any particular exceeded his powers. He might, on the other hand, have
thought it imprudent to attack that enemy, and, under that idea, have
suffered him to escape. Under the direction of his superiors, he is bound
to obey: when alone, he is left to his own discretion. Procopius70 relates
the adventure of two soldiers, the one a Goth and the other a Roman,
who, being fallen together into a pit, mutually promised each other that
their lives should be spared: and this agreement was approved by the
Goths.* <416>
chapter xvii
Of Safe-conducts and Passports,—with Questions
on the Ransom of Prisoners of War.
Safe-conducts and passports are a kind of privilege insuring safety to
persons in passing and repassing, or to certain things during their con-
veyance from one place to another. From the usage and genius of the
[French] language, it appears that the term “passport” is used, on or-
dinary occasions, when speaking of persons who lie under no particular
exception as to passing and repassing in safety, and to whom it is only
granted for greater security, and in order to prevent all debate, or to ex-
empt them from some general prohibition. A safe-conduct is given to
those who otherwise could not safely pass through the places where he
who grants it is master,—as, for instance, to a person charged with some
misdemeanor, or to an enemy. It is of the latter that we are here to treat.
* Hist. Goth. lib. ii. cap. 1, quoted by Puffendorf, book viii. chap. 7, §14.
70. Procopius of Caesarea, 500–565, Byzantine scholar and historian.
§265. Na-
ture of safe-
conducts and
passports.


634
book iii: of war
All safe-conducts, like every other act of supremecommand,emanate
from the sovereign authority: but the prince may delegate to his ofﬁcers
the power of granting safe-conducts; and they are invested with that
power, either by an express commission, or by a natural consequence of
the nature of their functions. A general of an army, from the very nature
of his post, can grant safe-conducts: and as they are derived, though
mediately, from the sovereign authority, the other generals or ofﬁcers of
the same prince are bound to respect them.
The person named in the safe-conduct cannot transfer his privilege
to another: for he does not know whether it be a matter of indifference
to the granter of the safe-conduct that another person should use it in
his stead: and so far from presuming that to be the case, he is even bound
to presume the contrary, on account of the abuses which might thence
result; and he cannot assume to himself any farther privilege than was
intended for him. If the safe-conduct is granted, not for persons, but for
certain effects, those effects may be removed by othersbesidestheowner.
The choice of those who remove them is indifferent, provided there do
not lie against them any personal exception sufﬁcient to render them
objects of just suspicion in the eye of him who grants the safe-conduct,
or to exclude them from the privilege of entering his territories.
He who promises security by a safe-conduct, promises to afford it
wherever he has the command,—not only in his own territories, but
likewise in every place where any of his troops may happen to be: and
he is bound, not only to forbear violating <417> that security either by
himself or his people, but also to protect and defend thepersontowhom
he has promised it, to punish any of his subjects who have offered him
violence, and oblige them to make good the damage.*
* At the famous interview at Peronne [[1468]], Charles duke of Burgundy [[r.
1467–77]], exasperated to ﬁnd that Louis XI. [[r. 1461–83]] had engaged the people
of Liege to take up arms against him, paid no respect to the safe-conduct which he
had granted to that prince. If Louis had plotted and negotiated their defection while
he was at Peronne, Charles would have been justiﬁable in disregardingasafe-conduct
of which an improper use had been made. But the French monarch had dispatched
agents to Ghent for that purpose, before there was any question of the meeting at
Peronne; and Charles, in the transports of blind resentment excited by the disagree-
§266. From
what authority
they emanate.
§267. Not
transferable
from one
person to
another.
§268. Extent
of the prom-
ised security.


chapter xvii
635
As the right arising from a safe-conduct proceeds entirely from the
will of him who grants it, that will is the standard by which the extent
of the right is to be measured; and the will is discoverable in the object
for which the safe-conduct was granted. Consequently a person who has
barely obtained permission to go away, does not thence derive a right to
come back again; and a safe-conduct granted for the simple passage
through a country does not entitle the bearer to repass through it on his
return. When the safe-conduct is granted for a particular business, it
must continue in force until that business is concluded, and the person
has had time to depart: if it is speciﬁed to be granted for a journey, it
will also serve for the person’s return, since both passage and return are
included in a journey. As this privilege consists in the liberty of going
and coming in safety, it differs from a permission to settle in any partic-
ular place, and consequently cannot give a right to stop any-where for a
length of time, unless on some special business, in consideration of
which the safe-conduct was asked and granted.
A safe-conduct given to a traveller naturally includes his baggage, or
his clothes and other things necessary for his journey, with even one or
two domestics, or more, according to the rank of the person. But in all
these respects, as well as in the others which we have just noticed above,
the safest mode, especially when we have to do with enemies or other
suspected persons, is to specify and distinctly enumerate the particulars,
in order to obviate every difﬁculty. Accordingly, such is the practice
which at present prevails; and, in granting safe-conducts, itis thecustom
expressly to include the baggage and domestics.
Though a permission to settle any-where, granted to the father of a
family, naturally includes his wife and children, it is otherwise with a
safe-conduct; because it seldom happens that a man settles in a place
without having his family with him; whereas, on a journey, it is more
usual to travel without them.
able and unexpected intelligence, committed a ﬂagrant breach of the law of nations.
[[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§269. How to
judge of the
right derived
from a safe-
conduct.
§270. Whether
it includes
baggage and
domestics.
§271. Safe-
conduct
granted to
the father
does not
include his
family.

636
book iii: of war
A safe-conduct granted to a person for himself and his retinue, cannot
give him a right of bringing with him persons justly suspected by the
state, or who have been banished, or have ﬂed from the country on ac-
count of any crime; nor can it serve as a protection to such men: for the
sovereign who grants a safe-<418>conduct in those general terms, does
not suppose that it will be presumptuously abused for the purpose of
bringing persons into his territories who have been guilty of crimes or
have particularly offended him.
A safe-conduct given for a stated term, expires at the end of the term
speciﬁed therein: and the bearer, if he does not retire before that time,
may be arrested, and even punished, according to circumstances, espe-
cially if he has given room for suspicion by an affected delay.
But if forcibly detained, as by sickness, so as to be unable to depart
in time, a proper respite should be allowed him: for a promise of security
has been made to him; and though it was made only for a limited time,
it is not by any fault of his own that he has been prevented from de-
parting within the term. The case is different from that of an enemy
coming into our country during a truce: to the latter we have made no
particularpromise:heathisownperiltakesadvantageof ageneralliberty
allowed by the suspension of hostilities. All we have promised to the
enemy is, to forbear hostilities for a certain time: and, at the expiration
of that term, it is a matter of importance to us that we be at liberty to
let the war freely take its course, without being impeded by a variety of
excuses and pretexts.
The safe-conduct does not expire at the decease or deposition of him
whograntedit;foritwasgiveninvirtueof thesovereignauthority,which
never dies, and whose efﬁcacy exists independent of thepersonintrusted
with the exercise of it. It is with this act as with other ordinances of the
public power: their validity or duration does not depend on the life of
him who enacted them, unless, by their very nature, or by express dec-
laration, they are personally conﬁned to him.
The successor, nevertheless, may revoke asafe-conduct,if hehasgood
reasons for the revocation. Even he who has granted it, may in like case
revoke it: nor is he always obliged to make known his reasons. Every
privilege, when it becomes detrimental to the state, may be revoked,—
§272. Safe-
conduct given
in general to
any one and
his retinue.
§273. Term
of the safe-
conduct.
§274. A
person forcibly
detained
beyond the
term.
§275. The
safe-conduct
does not expire
at the death
of him who
gave it.
§276. How
it may be
revoked.


chapter xvii
637
a gratuitous privilege, purely and simply,—a purchasedprivilege,ongiv-
ing an indemniﬁcation to the parties concerned. Suppose a prince or his
general is preparing for a secret expedition,—must he suffer any person,
under cover of a safe-conduct antecedently obtained, to come and pry
into his preparatives, and give the enemy intelligence of them? But a
safe-conduct is not to be converted into a snare: if it be revoked, the
bearer must be allowed time and liberty to depart in safety. If he, like
any other traveller, be detained for some time in order to prevent his
carrying intelligence to the enemy, no ill treatment is to be offered him;
nor is he tobekeptlongerthanwhilethereasonsforhisdetaindersubsist.
If a safe-conduct contains this clause, “For such time as we shall think
ﬁt,” it gives only a precarious right, and is revocable every moment: but,
until it has been expressly revoked, it <419> remains valid. It expires on
the death of him who gave it, who from that moment ceases to will the
continuation of the privilege. But it must always be understood that
when a safe-conduct expires in this manner, the bearer is to be allowed
a proper time for his safe departure.
After having discussed the right of making prisoners of war,—the
obligation of the captor to release them at the peace by exchange or
ransom,—and that of their sovereign to obtain theirliberty,—itremains
to consider the nature of those conventions whose object is the deliv-
erance of these unfortunate sufferers. If the belligerent sovereigns have
agreed on a cartel for the exchange or ransom of prisoners, they are
bound to observe it with equal ﬁdelity as any other convention. But if
(as was frequently the practice in former times) the state leaves to each
prisoner, at least during the continuance of the war, the care of redeem-
ing himself,—such private conventions present a number of questions,
of which we shall only touch on the principal ones.
He who has acquired a lawful right to demand a ransom from his
prisoner may transfer his right to a third person. This was practised in
the last ages. It was frequent for military men to resign their prisoners,
and transfer all the rights they had over them, into other hands. But, as
the person who takes a prisoner is bound to treat him with justice and
humanity (§150), he must not, if he wishes that his conduct should be
free from censure, transfer his right, in an unlimited manner, to onewho
§277. Safe-
conduct with
the clause, for
such time as we
shall think ﬁt.
§278. Conven-
tions relating
to the ransom
of prisoners.
§279. The
right of
demanding a
ransom may be
transferred.


638
book iii: of war
might make an improper use of it: when he has agreed with his prisoner
concerning the price of his ransom, he may transfer to whom he pleases
the right to demand the stipulated sum.
When once the agreement is made with a prisoner for the price of his
ransom, it becomes a perfect contract, and cannot be rescinded under
pretence that the prisoner is discovered to be richer than was imagined:
for it is by no means necessary that the rate should be proportioned to
the wealth of the prisoner, sincethatis notthescalebywhichwemeasure
the right to detain a prisoner of war (§§148, 153). But it is natural to
proportion the price of the ransom to the prisoner’s rank in the hostile
army, because the liberty of an ofﬁcer of distinction is of greater con-
sequence than that of a private soldier or an inferior ofﬁcer. If the pris-
oner has not only concealed but disguised his rank, it is a fraud on his
part, which gives the captor a right to annul the compact.
If a prisoner, having agreed on the price of his ransom, dies before
payment, it is asked whether the stipulated sum be due, and whetherthe
heirs are bound to pay it? They undoubtedly are, if the prisoner died in
the possession of his liberty: for, from the moment of his release, in
consideration of which he had promised a sum, that sum becomes due,
and does not at all belong to his heirs. But if he had not yet obtained
his liberty, the price which was to have been paid for it, is not a debt on
him or <420> his heirs, unless he had made his agreement in a different
manner: and he is not reputed to have received his liberty until the mo-
ment when he is perfectly free to depart at pleasure,—when neither the
person who held him prisoner, nor that person’s sovereign, opposes his
release and departure.
If he has only been permitted to take a journey for the purpose of
prevailing on his friends or his sovereign to furnish him with the means
of ransoming himself, and dies before he is possessed of his full liberty,
before he is ﬁnally discharged from his parole,—nothing is due for his
ransom.
If, after having agreed on the price, he is detained in prison till the
time of payment, and there dies in the interim, his heirs are not bound
to pay the ransom,—such an agreement being, on the part of the person
who held him prisoner, no more than a promise of giving him his liberty
§280. What
may annul the
convention
made for the
rate of the
ransom.
§281. A pris-
oner dying be-
fore payment
of ransom.


chapter xvii
639
on the actual payment of a certain sum. A promise of buying and selling
does not bind the supposed purchaser to pay the price of the article in
question, if it happens to perish before the completion of the purchase.
But if the contract of sale be perfect, the purchaser must pay the price
of the thing sold, though it should happen to perish before delivery,
provided there was no fault or delay on the part of the vender. For this
reason, if the prisoner has absolutely concluded the agreement for his
ransom, acknowledging himself, from that moment, debtor for the stip-
ulated sum,—and is nevertheless still detained, no longer indeed as a
prisoner, but as surety for the payment,—the price of the ransom is due,
notwithstanding the circumstance of his dying in the interim.
If the agreement says that the ransom shall be paid on a certain day,
and the prisoner happens to die before that day, the heirs are bound to
pay the sum agreed on: for the ransom was due; and the appointed day
was assigned merely as the term of payment.
From a rigid application of the same principles, it follows, that a
prisoner, who has been released on condition of procuring the release
of another, should return to prison, in case the latter happens to die
before he has been able to procure him his liberty. But certainly such
an unfortunate case is entitled to lenity; and equity seems to require
that this prisoner should be allowed to continue in the enjoyment of
that liberty which has been granted to him, provided he pays a fair
equivalent for it, since he is now unable to purchase it precisely at the
price agreed on.
If a prisoner, who has been fully set at liberty after having promised
but not paid his ransom, happens to be taken a second time, it is evident,
that, without being exempted from the payment of his former ransom,
he will have to pay a second, if he wishes to recover his liberty.
On the other hand, though the prisoner has agreed for the price of
his ransom, if, before the execution of the compact,—before he is set at
liberty in virtue of it,—he be retaken and delivered by his own party, he
owes nothing. I here evidently <421> suppose that the contract for his
ransom was not completed, and that the prisoner had notacknowledged
himself debtor for the sum agreed on. The person who held him pris-
oner, had, as it were, only made him a promise of selling, and he had
§282. Prisoner
released on
condition of
procuring the
release of
another.
§283. Prisoner
retaken before
he has paid his
former ransom.
§284. Prisoner
rescued before
he has received
his liberty.


640
book iii: of war
promised to purchase: but the purchase and sale had not actually passed
into effect; the property was not actually transferred.
The property of a prisoner’s effects is not vested in the captor, except
so far as he seizes on those effects at the time of his capture. Of thisthere
is no doubt, in these modern times when prisoners of war are not re-
duced to slavery. And even by the law of nature, the property of a slave’s
goods does not, without some other reason, pass to the master of the
slave. There is nothing in the nature of slavery, which can of itself pro-
duce that effect. Though a man obtains certain rights over the liberty of
another, does it thence follow that he shall have a right over his property
also? When, therefore, the enemy has not plundered his prisoner, or
when the latter has found means to conceal something from the captor’s
search, whatever he has thus saved still continues to be his own property,
and he may employ it towards the payment of his ransom. At present,
even the plundering of prisoners is not always practised: the greedy sol-
dier sometimes proceeds to such lengths; but an ofﬁcer would think it
an indelible stain on his character, to have deprived them of the smallest
article. A party of private French troopers, who had captured a British
general at the battle of Rocoux,71 claimed no right to any thing belong-
ing to their prisoner, except his arms alone.
The death of the prisoner extinguishes the captor’s right. Wherefore,
if any person is given as a hostage in order to procure a prisoner’s en-
largement, he ought to be released the moment the prisoner dies; and,
on the other hand, if the hostage dies, his death does not reinstate the
prisoner in the possession of his liberty. The reverse of this is true, if the
one, instead of being simply a hostagefortheother,hadbeensubstituted
in his stead.
71. In 1746.
§285. Whether
the things
which a pris-
oner has found
means to con-
ceal, belong
to him.
§286. Hostage
given for the
release of a
prisoner.


chapter xviii
641
chapter xviii
Of Civil War.
It is a question very much debated, whether a sovereign is bound to
observe the common laws of war towards rebellious subjects who have
openly taken up arms against him? A ﬂatterer, or a prince of a cruel and
arbitrary disposition, will immediately pronounce that the laws of war
were not made for rebels, for whom no punishment can be too severe.
Let us proceed more soberly, and reason from the incontestable princi-
ples above laid down. In order clearly to discover what conduct thesove-
<422>reign ought to pursue towards revolted subjects, we must, in the
ﬁrst place, recollect that all the sovereign’s rights are derived from those
of the state or of civil society, from the trust reposed in him, from the
obligation he lies under of watching over the welfare of the nation, of
procuring her greatest happiness, of maintaining order, justice, and
peace within her boundaries (Book I. Chap. IV.). Secondly, we must
distinguish the nature and degree of the different disorders which may
disturb the state, and oblige the sovereign to take up arms, or substitute
forcible measures instead of the milder inﬂuence of authority.
The name of rebels is given to all subjects who unjustly take up arms
against the ruler of the society, whether their view be to deprive him of
the supreme authority, or to resist his commands in some particular in-
stance, and to impose conditions on him.
A popular commotion is a concourse of people who assemble in a
tumultuous manner, and refuse to listen to the voice of their superiors,
whether the design of the assembled multitude be levelled against the
superiors themselves, or only against some private individuals. Violent
commotions of this kind take place when the people think themselves
aggrieved; and there is no order of men who so frequently give rise to
them, as the tax-gatherers. If the rage of the malcontents be particularly
levelled at the magistrates, or others vested with the public authority,
and they proceed to a formal disobedience or acts of open violence, this
is called a sedition. When the evil spreads,—when it infects the majority
of the inhabitants of a city or province, and gains such strength that
§287. Foun-
dation of the
sovereign’s
rights against
the rebels.
§288. Who
are rebels.
§289. Popular
commotion,
insurrection,
sedition.

642
book iii: of war
even the sovereign himself is no longer obeyed,—it is usual more par-
ticularly to distinguish such a disorder by the name of insurrection.
All these violences disturb the public order, and are state crimes, even
when arising from just causes of complaint. For violent measures are
forbidden in civil society: the injured individuals should apply to the
magistrate for redress; and if they donotobtainjusticefromthatquarter,
they may lay their complaints at the foot of the throne. Every citizen
should even patiently endure evils which are not insupportable, rather
than disturb the public peace. A denial of justice on the part of the
sovereign, or affected delays, can alone excuse the furious transports of
a people whose patience has been exhausted,—and even justify them, if
the evils be intolerable, and the oppression great and manifest. But what
conduct shall the sovereign observe towards the insurgents? I answer, in
general,—such conduct as shall at the same time be the most consonant
to justice, and the most salutary to the state. Although it be his duty to
repress those who unnecessarily disturb the public peace, he is bound to
shew clemency towards unfortunate persons, to whom just causes of
complaint have been given, and whose sole crime consists in the attempt
to do themselves justice: they have been deﬁcient in patience ra-
<423>ther than ﬁdelity. Subjects who rise against their prince without
cause, deserve severe punishment: yet, even in this case, on account of
the number of the delinquents, clemency becomes a duty in the sov-
ereign. Shall he depopulate a city, or desolate a province, in order to
punish her rebellion? Any punishment, however just in itself, whichem-
braces too great a number of persons, becomes an act of downright cru-
elty. Had the insurrection of the Netherlands against Spain been totally
unwarrantable, universal detestation would still attend the memory of
the duke of Alva,72 who made it his boast that he had caused twenty
thousand heads to be struck off by the hands of the common execu-
tioner. Let not his sanguinary imitators expect to justify their enormities
by the plea of necessity. What prince ever suffered more outrageous in-
72. Don Fernando A´lvarez de Toledo y Pimental, third duke of Alba, 1507–82,
Spanish general and governor of theSpanishNetherlands(1567–73),named“theIron
Duke” by the Protestants for his cruelty.
§290. How the
sovereign is to
suppress them.
chapter xviii
643
dignities from his subjects than Henry the Great of France? Yet his vic-
torieswereeveraccompaniedbyanuniformclemency;andthatexcellent
prince at length obtained the success he deserved: he gained a nation of
faithful subjects; whereas the duke of Alva caused his master to lose the
United Provinces. Crimes in which a number of persons are involved,
are to be punished by penalties which shall equally fall on all the parties
concerned: the sovereign may deprive a town of her privileges, at least
till she has fully acknowledged her fault: as to corporal punishment, let
that be reserved for the authors of the disturbances,—for those incen-
diaries who incite the people to revolt. But tyrants alone will treat, as
seditious, those brave and resolute citizens who exhort the people to pre-
serve themselves from oppression, and to vindicatetheirrightsandprivi-
leges: a good prince will commend such virtuous patriots,providedtheir
zeal be tempered with moderation and prudence. If he has justice and
his duty at heart,—if he aspires to that immortal and unsullied glory of
being the father of his people, let him mistrust the selﬁsh suggestionsof
that minister who represents to him as rebels all those citizens who do
not stretch out their necks to the yoke of slavery,—who refuse tamely
to crouch under the rod of arbitrary power.
In many cases, the safest and at the same time the most just method
of appeasing seditions is to give the people satisfaction. And if there
existed no reasons to justify the insurrection (a circumstance which per-
haps never happens), even in such case, it becomes necessary, as we have
above observed, to grant an amnesty where the offenders are numerous.
When the amnesty is once published and accepted, all the past must be
buried in oblivion; nor must any one be called to account for what has
been done during the disturbances: and in general, the sovereign,whose
word ought ever to be sacred, is bound tothefaithfulobservanceof every
promise he has made even to rebels,—I mean, to such of his subjects as
have revolted without reason or necessity. If his promises are not invi-
olable, the rebels will have no security in treating with him: when they
have once drawn <424> the sword, they must throw away the scabbard,
as one of the ancients expresses it; and the prince, destitute of the more
gentle and salutary means of appeasing the revolt, will have no other
remaining expedient than that of utterly exterminating the insurgents.
§291. He is
bound to
perform the
promises he
has made to
the rebels.


644
book iii: of war
These will become formidable through despair; compassion will bestow
succours on them; their party will increase, and the state will be in dan-
ger. What would have become of France, if the leaguers had thought it
unsafe to rely on the promises of Henry the Great?73 The same reasons
which should render the faith of promises inviolable and sacredbetween
individual and individual, betweensovereignandsovereign,betweenen-
emy and enemy (Book II. §§163, 218, &c. and Book III. §174), subsist in
all their force between the sovereign and his insurgent or rebellious sub-
jects. However, if they have extorted fromhimodiousconditions,which
are inimical to the happiness of the nation or the welfare of the state,—
as he has no right to do or grant any thing contrary to that grand rule
of his conduct, which is at the same time the measure of his power, he
may justly revoke any pernicious concessions which he has been obliged
to make, provided the revocation be sanctioned by the consent of the
nation, whose opinion he must take on the subject, in the manner and
forms pointed out to him by the constitution of the state. But this rem-
edy is to be used with great reserve, and only in matters of high impor-
tance, lest the faith of promises should be weakened and brought it into
disrepute.*
When a party is formed in a state, who no longer obey the sovereign,
and are possessed of sufﬁcient strength to oppose him,—or when, in a
republic, the nation is divided into two opposite factions, and bothsides
take up arms,—this is called a civil war. Some writers conﬁne this term
to a just insurrection of the subjects against their sovereign, to distin-
guish that lawful resistance from rebellion, which is an open and unjust
resistance. But what appellation will they give to a war which arises in a
republic torn by two factions,—or in a monarchy, between two com-
petitors for the crown? Custom appropriates the term of “civil war” to
every war between the members of one and the same political society.
* An instance of this occurs in the transactions which took place after the insur-
rection at Madrid, in 1766. At the requisition of the cortes, the king [[Charles III, r.
1759–88]] revoked the concessions which he had been obliged to make to the insur-
gent populace: but he suffered the amnesty to remain in force. [[Note added in 1773/
1797 editions.]]
73. Henry IV of France, r. 1589–1610.
§292. Civil
war.


chapter xviii
645
If it be between part of the citizens on the one side, and the sovereign
with those who continue in obedience to him on the other,—provided
the malcontents have any reason for taking up arms, nothing further is
required to entitle such disturbance to the name of civil war, and not
that of rebellion. This latter term is applied only to such an insurrection
against lawful authority, as is void of all appearance of justice. The sov-
ereign indeed never fails to bestow the appellation of rebels on <425> all
such of his subjects as openly resist him: but when the latter have ac-
quired sufﬁcient strength to give him effectual opposition, and to oblige
him to carry on the war against them according to the established rules,
he must necessarily submit to the use of the term “civil war.”
It is foreign to our purpose in this place to weigh the reasons which
may authorise and justify a civil war: we have elsewhere treated of the
cases wherein subjects may resist the sovereign (Book I. Chap. IV.). Set-
ting therefore, the justice of the cause wholly out of the question, itonly
remains for us to consider the maxims which ought to be observed in a
civil war, and to examine whether the sovereign in particular is, on such
an occasion, bound to conform to the established laws of war.
A civil war breaks the bands of society and government, or at least
suspends their force and effect: it produces in the nation two indepen-
dent parties, who consider each other as enemies, and acknowledge no
common judge. Those two parties, therefore, must necessarily be con-
sidered as thenceforward constituting, at least for a time, two separate
bodies, two distinct societies. Though one of the parties may have been
to blame in breaking the unity of the state and resisting the lawful au-
thority, they are not the less divided in fact. Besides, who shall judge
them? who shall pronounce on which side the right or the wrong lies?
On earth they have no common superior. They stand therefore in pre-
cisely the same predicament as two nations, who engage in a contest,
and, being unable to come to an agreement, have recourse to arms.
This being the case, it is very evident that the common laws of war,—
those maxims of humanity, moderation, and honour, which we have
already detailed in the course of this work,—ought to be observed by
both parties in every civil war. For the same reasons which render the
observance of those maxims a matter of obligation between state and
§293. A civil
war produces
two indepen-
dent parties.
§294. They are
to observe the
common laws
of war.


646
book iii: of war
state, it becomes equally and even more necessary in the unhappy cir-
cumstance of two incensed parties lacerating their common country.
Should the sovereign conceive he has a right to hang up his prisoners as
rebels, theoppositepartywillmakereprisals:*—if hedoesnotreligiously
observe the capitulations, and all other conventions made with his en-
emies, they will no longer rely on his word:—should he burnandravage,
they will follow his example; the war will become cruel, horrible, and
every day more destructive <426> to the nation. The duke de Mont-
pensier’s74 infamous and barbarous excesses against the reformed party
in France are too well known: the men were delivered up to the execu-
tioner, and the women to the brutality of the soldiers. What was the
consequence? the protestants became exasperated; they took vengeance
of such inhuman practices; and the war, before sufﬁciently cruel as a
civil and religious war, became more bloody and destructive. Whocould
without horror read of the savage cruelties committed by the baron Des
Adrets?75 By turns a catholic and a protestant, he distinguished himself
by his barbarityonbothsides.Atlengthitbecamenecessarytorelinquish
those pretensions to judicial authority over men who proved themselves
capable of supporting their cause by force of arms, and to treat them,
not as criminals, but as enemies. Even the troops have often refused to
serve in a war whereintheprinceexposedthemtocruelreprisals.Ofﬁcers
who had the highest sense of honour, though ready to shed their blood
in the ﬁeld of battle for his service, have not thought it any part of their
* The prince of Conde´ [[Louis II de Bourbon, 1621–86]], commander of
Louis XIII’s forces against the reformed party, having hanged sixty-four ofﬁcers
whom he had made prisoners during the civil war, the protestants resolved upon
retaliation; and the duke de Rohan, who commanded them, caused an equal number
of catholic ofﬁcers to be hanged. See Memoires de Rohan.
The duke of Alva made it a practice to condemn to death every prisoner he took
from the confederates in the Netherlands.They,ontheirpart,retaliated,andatlength
compelled him to respect the law of nations and the rules of war in his conduct
towards them. Grotius, Ann. lib. ii. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
74. Franc¸ois, Duc de Montpensier, 1542–92, fought for Henry IV of France in
the 1580s and early 1590s.
75. Franc¸ois de Beaumont, Baron des Adrets, 1513–87, Huguenot leader during
the Wars of Religion in France. He was notorious for his excessive violence, and for
changing sides.


chapter xviii
647
duty to run the hazard of an ignominious death. Whenever, therefore,
a numerous body of men think they have a right to resist the sovereign,
and feel themselves in a condition to appeal to the sword, the war ought
to be carried on by the contending parties in the same manner as by two
different nations; and they ought to leave open the same means for pre-
venting its being carried to outrageous extremities, and for the restora-
tion of peace.
When the sovereign has subdued the opposite party, and reduced
them to submit and sue for peace, he may except from the amnesty the
authors of the disturbances,—the heads of the party: he maybringthem
to a legal trial, and punish them, if they be found guilty. He may act in
this manner particularly on occasion of those disturbances in which the
interests of the people are not so much the object in view as the private
aims of some powerful individuals, and which rather deserve the ap-
pellation of revolt than of civil war. Such was thecaseof theunfortunate
duke of Montmorency:—he took up arms against the king,76 in support
of the duke of Orle´ans; and being defeated and taken prisoner at the
battle of Castelnaudari,77 he lost his life on a scaffold, by the sentence
of the parliament of Toulouse. If he was generally pitied by all men of
worth and sentiment, it was because they viewed him rather as an op-
ponent to the exorbitant power of an imperious minister, than as a rebel
against his sovereign,—and that his heroic virtues seemed to warrantthe
purity of his intentions.*
When subjects take up arms without ceasing to acknowledge the sov-
ereign, and only for the purpose of obtaining a redress of their griev-
ances, there are two reasons for observing the common laws of war to-
wards them:—First, an apprehension lest the <427> civil war should
become more cruel and destructive by the insurgentsmakingretaliation,
which, as we have already observed, they will not fail to do, in return for
the severities exercised by the sovereign. 2. The danger of committing
* See the historians of the reign of Louis XIII. [[Le Vassor, Velly,Daniel,Me´zeray.]]
76. King Louis XIII of France, r. 1610–43.
77. Louis XIII defeated the rebellion of his brother Gaston d’Orle´ans and Henri
de Montmorency at Castelnaudary in September 1632.
§295. The
effects of civil
war distin-
guished
according
to cases.

648
book iii: of war
great injustice by hastily punishing those who are accounted rebels. The
ﬂames of discord and civil war are not favourable to the proceedings of
pure and sacred justice: more quiet times are to be waited for. It will be
wise in the prince to keep his prisoners till, having restored tranquillity,
he is able to bring them to a legal trial.
As to the other effects which the law of nations attributes to public
war (See Chap. XII. of this Book), and particularly the acquisition of
things taken in war,—subjects who take up arms against their sovereign
without ceasing to acknowledge him, cannot lay claim to the beneﬁt of
those effects. The booty alone, the movable property carried off by the
enemy, is considered as lost to the owners; but this is only on account
of the difﬁculty of recognising it, and the numberless inconveniences
which would arise fromtheattempttorecoverit.Allthisisusuallysettled
in the edict of paciﬁcation or the act of amnesty.
But when a nation becomes divided into two parties absolutely in-
dependent, and no longer acknowledging a common superior, the state
is dissolved, and the war between the two parties stands on the same
ground, in every respect, as a public war between two different nations.
Whether a republic be split into two factions, each maintaining that it
alone constitutes the body of the state,—or a kingdom be divided be-
tween two competitors for the crown,—the nation is severed into two
parties who will mutually term each other rebels. Thus there exist in the
state two separate bodies, who pretend to absolute independence, and
between whom there is no judge (§293). They decide their quarrel by
arms, as two different nations would do. The obligation to observe the
common laws of war towards each other is therefore absolute,—indis-
pensably binding on both parties, and the same which the law of nature
imposes on all nations in transactions between state and state.
Foreign nations are not to interfere in the internal government of an
independent state (Book II. §54, &c.). It belongs not to them to judge
between the citizens whom discord has roused to arms, nor between the
prince and his subjects: both parties are equally foreigners to them, and
equally independent of their authority. They may however interpose
their good ofﬁces for the restoration of peace; and this the law of nature
prescribes to them (Book II. Ch. I.). But if their mediation proves fruit-
§296. Conduct
to be observed
by foreign
nations.


chapter xviii
649
less, such of them as are not bound by any treaty, may, with the view of
regulating their own conduct, take the merits of the cause into consid-
eration, and assist the party which they shall judge to have right on its
side, in case that party requests their assistance or accepts the offer of it:
they are equally at liberty, Isay, to do<428>this,astoespousethequarrel
of one nation embarking in a war against another. As to the allies of the
state thus distracted by civil war, they will ﬁnd a rule for their conduct
in the nature of their engagements, combined with the existing circum-
stances. Of this we have treated elsewhere. (See Book II. Chap. XII.and
particularly §§196 and 197.) <429>

651
the
LAW
of
NATIONS
u
b o o k i v
u
Of the Restoration of Peace;
and of Embassies
chapter i
Of Peace, and the Obligation to cultivate it.
Peace is the reverse of war: it is that desirable state in which every one
quietly enjoys his rights, or, if controverted, amicably discusses them by
force of argument. Hobbs has had the boldness to assert that war is the
natural stateof man.Butif,by“thenaturalstateof man,”weunderstand
(as reason requires that we should) that state to which he is destined and
called by his nature, peace should rather be termed his natural state. For
it is the part of a rational being to terminate his differences by rational
methods; whereas it is the characteristic of the brute creation to decide
theirs by force.* Man, as we have already observed (Prelim. §10), alone
* Nam cum sint duo genera decertandi, unum per disceptationem, alterum per
vim,—cumque illud proprium sit hominis, hoc belluarum,—confugiendum est ad
posterius, si uti non licet superiore. [[“For, since there are two ways of settling a
dispute: ﬁrst, by discussion, second by physical force; and since the former is a char-
§1. What
peace is.


652
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
and destitute of succours, would necessarily be a very wretchedcreature.
He stands in need of the intercourse and assistance of his species, in
order to enjoy the sweets of life, to develop his faculties, and live in a
manner suitable to his nature. Now, it is in peace alone that all these
advantages are to be found: it is in peace that men respect, <430> assist,
and love each other: nor would they ever depart from that happy state,
if they were not hurried on by the impetuosity of their passions, and
blinded by the gross deceptions of self-love. What little we have said of
the effects of war will be sufﬁcient to give some idea of its various ca-
lamities; and it is an unfortunate circumstance for the human race, that
the injustice of unprincipled men should so often render it inevitable.
Nations who are really impressed with sentiments of humanity,—
who seriously attend to their duty, and are acquainted with their true
and substantial interests,—will never seek to promote their own advan-
tage at the expense and detriment of other nations: however intent they
may be on their own happiness, they will ever be careful to combine it
with that of others, and with justice and equity. Thus disposed, theywill
necessarily cultivate peace. If they do not live together in peace, howcan
they perform those mutual and sacred dutieswhichnatureenjoinsthem?
And this state is found to be no less necessary to their happiness than to
the discharge of their duties. Thus the law of nature every way obliges
them to seek and cultivate peace. That divine law has no other end in
view than the welfare of mankind: to that object all its rules and all its
precepts tend: they are all deducible from this principle,thatmenshould
seek their own felicity; and morality is no more than the art of acquiring
happiness. As this is true of individuals, it is equally so of nations, as
must appear evident to any one who will but take the trouble of reﬂect-
ing on what we have said of their common and reciprocal duties in the
ﬁrst chapter of the second book.
This obligation of cultivating peace binds the sovereign by a double
tie. He owes this attention to his people, on whom war would pour a
torrent of evils; and he owes it in the most strict and indispensableman-
acteristic of man, and the latter of the brute, we must resort to force only in case we
may not avail ourselves of discussion.”]] Cicero, de Ofﬁc. lib. i. cap. 2.
§2. Obligation
of cultivating it.
§3. The sover-
eign’s obliga-
tion to it.


chapter i
653
ner, since it is solely for the advantage and welfare of the nation that he
is intrusted with the government (Book I. §39). He owes the same at-
tention to foreign nations, whose happiness likewise is disturbed by war.
The nation’s duty in this respect has been shewn in the preceding chap-
ter; and the sovereign, being invested with the public authority, is at the
same timecharged withallthedutiesof thesociety,orbodyof thenation
(Book I. §41).
The nation or the sovereign ought not only to refrain, on their own
part, from disturbing that peace which is so salutary to mankind: they
are moreover bound to promote it as far as lies in their power,—to pre-
vent others from breaking it without necessity, and to inspire them with
the love of justice, equity, and public tranquillity,—in a word, with the
love of peace. It is one of the best ofﬁces a sovereign can render to na-
tions, and to the whole universe. What a glorious and amiable character
is that of peace-maker! Were a powerful prince thoroughly acquainted
with the advantages attending it,—were he to conceive what pure and
effulgent glory he may derive from that endearing character, together
with the gratitude, the love, the venera-<431>tion, and the conﬁdence
of nations,—did he know what it is to reign over the hearts of men,—
he would wish thus to become the benefactor, the friend, the father of
mankind; and in being so, he would ﬁnd inﬁnitely more delight than in
the most splendid conquests. Augustus,1 shutting the temple of Janus,
giving peace to the universe, and adjusting the disputes of kings and
nations,—Augustus, at that moment, appears the greatest of mortals,
and, as it were, a god upon earth.
But those disturbers of the public peace,—those scourges of the
earth, who, ﬁred by a lawless thirst of power, or impelled by the pride
and ferocity of their disposition, snatch up arms without justice or rea-
son, and sport with the quiet of mankind and the blood of their sub-
jects,—those monstrous heroes, though almost deiﬁed by the foolish
admiration of the vulgar, are in effect the most cruel enemies of the
human race, and ought to be treated as such. Experience shews what a
train of calamities war entails even upon nations that are not immedi-
1. Gaius Octavian, Emperor Augustus, r. 27 b.c.–a.d. 14.
§4. Extent of
this duty.
§5. Of the
disturbers of
the public
peace.

654
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
ately engaged in it. War disturbs commerce, destroys the subsistence of
mankind, raises the price of all the most necessary articles, spreads just
alarms, and obliges all nations to be upon their guard, and to keep up
an armed force. He, therefore, who without just cause breaks thegeneral
peace, unavoidably does an injury even to those nations which are not
the objects of his arms; and by his pernicious example he essentially
attacks the happiness and safety of every nation upon earth. He gives
them a right to join ina general confederacyforthepurposeof repressing
and chastising him, and depriving him of a power which he so enor-
mously abuses. What evils does he not bringonhisownnation,lavishing
her blood to gratify his inordinate passions, and exposing her to the re-
sentment of a host of enemies! A famous minister of the last century2
has justly merited the indignation of his country, by involving her in
unjust or unnecessary wars. If by his abilities and indefatigable appli-
cation he procured her distinguished successes in the ﬁeld of battle, he
drew on her, at least for a time, the execration of all Europe.
The love of peace should equally prevent us from embarking in a war
without necessity,andfromperseveringinitafterthenecessityhasceased
to exist. When a sovereign has been compelled to take up arms for just
and important reasons, he may carry on the operations of war till he has
attained its lawful end, which is, to procure justice and safety (Book III.
§28).
If the cause be dubious, the just end of war can only be to bring the
enemy to an equitable compromise (Book III. §38); and consequently
the war must not be continued beyond that point. The moment our
enemy proposes or consents to such compromise, it is our duty to desist
from hostilities.
But if we have to do with a perﬁdious enemy, it would be imprudent
to trust either his words or his oaths. In such case, justice allows and
prudence requires that we should avail ourselves of a successful war,
and follow up our advantages, till we <432> have humbled a dangerous
and excessive power, or compelled the enemy to give us sufﬁcient se-
curity for the time to come.
2. Cardinal Richelieu, chief minister (1624–42) to King Louis XIII of France.
§6. How far
war may be
continued.


chapter ii
655
Finally, if the enemy obstinately rejects equitable conditions, hehim-
self forces us to continue our progress till we have obtained a complete
and decisive victory, by which he is absolutely reduced and subjected.
The use to be made of victory has been shewn above (Book III.
Chap. VIII. IX. XIII.).
When one of the parties is reduced to sue for peace, or both are weary
of the war, then thoughts of an accommodation are entertained, and
the conditions are agreed on. Thus peace steps in, and puts a period to
the war.
The general and necessary effects of peace are the reconciliation of
enemies, and the cessation of hostilities on both sides. It restores thetwo
nations to their natural state.
chapter ii
Treaties of Peace.
When the belligerent powers have agreed to lay down their arms, the
agreement or contract in which they stipulate the conditions of peace,
and regulate the manner in which it is to be restored and supported, is
called the treaty of peace.
The same power who has the right of making war, of determining
on it, of declaring it, and of directing its operations, has naturally that
likewise of making and concluding the treaty of peace. These two pow-
ers are connected together, and the latter naturally follows from the for-
mer. If the ruler of the state is empowered to judge of the causes and
reasons for which war is to be undertaken,—of the time and circum-
stances proper for commencing it,—of the manner in which it is to be
supported and carried on,—it is therefore his province alsotosetbounds
to its progress, to point out the time when it shall be discontinued, and
to conclude a peace. But this power does not necessarily include that of
granting or accepting whatever conditions he pleases, with a view to
peace. Though the state has intrusted to the prudence of her ruler the
general care of determining on war and peace, yet she may have limited
§7. Peace the
end of war.
§8. General
effects of
peace.
§9. Deﬁnition
of a treaty of
peace.
§10. By whom
it may be
concluded.


656
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
his power in many particulars by the fundamental laws. Thus Francis
the First, king of France, had the absolute disposal of war and peace:
and yet the assembly of Cognac declared that he had no authority to
alienate any part of the kingdom by a treaty of peace. (See BookI. §265.)
A nation that has the free disposal of her domestic affairs, and of the
form of her government, may intrust a single person or anassemblywith
the power of making peace, although she has not given them that of
making war. Of this we have an instance <433> in Sweden, where, since
the death of Charles XII.3 the king cannot declare war without the con-
sent of the states assembled in diet; but he may make peace in con-
junction with the senate. It is less dangerous for a nation to intrust her
rulers with this latter power, than with the former. She may reasonably
expect that they will not make peace till it suits with the interest of the
state. But their passions, their own interest, their private views, toooften
inﬂuence their resolutions when there is question of undertaking a war.
Besides, it must be a very disadvantageous peace indeed, that is not pref-
erable to war; whereas, on the other hand, to exchange peace for war, is
always very hazardous.
When a prince who is possessed only of limited authority has a power
to make peace, as he cannot of himself grant whatever conditions he
pleases, it is incumbent on those who wish to treat with him on sure
grounds, to require that the treaty of peace be ratiﬁed by the nation, or
by those who are empowered to perform the stipulations contained in
it. If, for instance, any potentate, in negotiating a treaty of peace with
Sweden, requires a defensive alliance or guaranty as the condition, this
stipulation will not be valid, unless approved and accepted by the diet,
who alone have the power of carrying it into effect. The kings of En-
gland are authorised to conclude treaties of peace and alliance; but they
cannot, by those treaties, alienate any of the possessions of the crown
without the consent of parliament. Neither can they, without the con-
currence of that body, raise any money in the kingdom: wherefore,
whenever they conclude any subsidiary treaty, it is their constant rule to
3. In 1718.


Introduction
ix
A Note on the Texts
xxi
Acknowledgments
xxv
the law of nations, or, principles of the
law of nature, applied to the conduct
and affairs of nations and sovereigns
1
Additional Essays
Essay on the Foundation of Natural Law and on the
First Principle of the Obligation Men Find Themselves
Under to Observe Laws. Translated by T. J. Hochstrasser
747
Dissertation on This Question: Can Natural Law Bring
Society to Perfection Without the Assistance of Political
Laws? Translated by T. J. Hochstrasser
773
Dialogue Between the Prince of **** and His Conﬁdant,
on Certain Essential Elements of Public Administration.
Translated by Kenneth Goodwin
783
Biographical Sketches of Authors Referred to by Vattel
797
Bibliography
Works Referred to by Vattel
813
Writings on Vattel
827
Index
831




ix
introduction
Life of Vattel
Emer1 de Vattel’s Le droit des gens. Ou Principes de la loi naturelle, ap-
plique´s a` la conduite & aux affaires des nations & des souverains (The Law
of Nations, or Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the Conduct and
Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns) (1758) was the most important book
on the law of nations in the eighteenth century. It was in great measure
thanks to this work that the practical and theoretical inﬂuenceof natural
jurisprudence was extended down through the Revolutionary and Na-
poleonic eras. Indeed, it was Vattel who was cited as a major source of
contemporary wisdom on questions of international law in the Amer-
ican Revolution and even by opponents of revolution, such as Cardinal
Consalvi, at the Congress of Vienna.
Emer de Vattel was born at Couvet, in Neuchaˆtel, a principalityruled
by the kings of Prussia, on April 25, 1714, as the youngest son of David
Vattel and Marie de Montmollin.2 His father, ennobled in 1727 by the
king of Prussia, Friedrich Wilhelm I, was a Protestant clergyman and
head of the local congregation of ministers; his motherwasthedaughter
1. Vattel was christened “Emer.” Modern authors have mistakenly given him a
German name, “Emerich.”
2. The most authoritative biography of Vattel is still E. Be´guelin, “En souvenir
de Vattel,” in Recueil de travaux offert par la Faculte´ de Droit de l’Universite´ de Neu-
chaˆtel a` la Socie´te´Suisse des Juristes a` l’occasiondesare´uniona` Neuchaˆtel,15–17septembre
1929, 35–176; in English, the most informative account is A. de Lapradelle’s intro-
duction to the Carnegie edition of The Law of Nations or the Principles of Natural
Law, iii–lix. For a concise summary, see also S. Beaulac, “Emer de Vattel and the
Externalization of Sovereignty,” Journal of the History of International Law 5 (2003):
237–92; especially pp. 242–47.

x
introduction
of the principality’s ambassador to the Prussiancourt.From1728to1730
Vattel was enrolled as a student of the humanities at the University of
Basel, where he seems to have attended courses on Samuel Pufendorf
given by the Huguenot minister Pierre Roques. In 1733 he went to Ge-
neva to pursue theological and metaphysical studies; one of his teachers
was Jean-Jacques Burlamaqui, and it was under Burlamaqui’s tutelage
that Vattel ﬁrst studied in detail the principles of natural law and the
law of nations. Little is known of the following years, but in 1740 and
1741 Vattel wrote a series of essays, several of which appeared in Swit-
zerland’s leading literary journal, the Neuchaˆtel-based Journal Helve´-
tique. 3 The same year also saw his lengthy defense of the philosophy of
Leibniz against the accusation of atheism made by the Lausanne pro-
fessor of philosophy and mathematics Jean-Pierre de Crousaz.4 Vattel’s
De´fense, which he dedicated to Friedrich II (“the Great”), earned him
an invitation from the French ambassador in Berlin to come to the court
of the prince whose subject he was by birth. However, he failedtoobtain
a diplomatic position and, pressed by ﬁnancial difﬁculties, in 1743 he
moved to Dresden, where he was promised employment by Count
Bru¨hl, ﬁrst minister of Elector Friedrich August II of Saxony (who as
August III was also the elective king of Poland). Vattel spent the next
three years in Neuchaˆtel, writing essays and studying the works of the
3. Vattel, “Apologie de la me´disance”; “Essai sur l’utilite´ du jeu”; and “Relation
d’un jugement rendu sur le Mont Olympe” appeared in the October and December
1740 issues of the Journal Helve´tique. In 1741 Vattel wrote a number of essays ex-
plaining the relation between self-love and friendship, in which he put forward some
of the arguments later developed in his discussion of the foundation of obligation:
“Lettre a` Mademoiselle deM . . . sur lessentimensde´licats,ge´ne´reuxetde´sinte´resse´s”;
“Lettre sur la nature de l’amour”; and “Sur la diffe´rence de l’amour et de l’amitie´.”
They were included in the Pie`ces diverses (see note 5) and Le loisir philosophique (see
note 6).
4. Vattel, De´fense du syste`me leibnitzien contre les objections et imputations de Mr de
Crousaz, contenues dans l’Examen de l’Essai sur l’homme de Mr Pope. Ou l’on a joint la
Re´ponse aux objections de Mr Roques, contenues dans le Journal Helve´tique, par Mr
Emer de Vattel (Leyde: Jean Luzac, 1741). See S. Zurbuchen, “Die schweizerische
Debatte u¨ber die Leibniz-Wolffsche Philosophie und ihre Bedeutung fu¨r Emer von
Vattels philosophischen Werdegang,” in Reconceptualizing Science, Nature, and Aes-
thetics, ed. P. Coleman, A. Hofmann, and S. Zurbuchen, 91–113.


introduction
xi
German philosopher Christian Wolff, while waiting for orders from
Dresden. These essays, which included his Dissertation sur cette question:
Si la loi naturelle peut porter la socie´te´ a` sa perfection, sans le secours des loix
politiques (Dissertation on This Question: Can Natural Law Bring Society
to Perfection Without the Assistance of Political Laws?) as well as the Essai
sur le fondement du droit naturel, et sur le premier principe de l’obligation
ou` se trouvent tous les hommes, d’en observer les loix (Essay on the Foun-
dation of Natural Law and on the First Principle of the Obligation Men
Find Themselves Under to Observe Laws), were published in 1746.5 In
1747, ﬁnally, after dedicating the second edition of the Pie`ces diverses to
Bru¨hl,6 he was granted a modest annual pension of 500 e´cus and sent as
a permanent minister to Berne. The purpose of his mission remains un-
clear; some of his compatriots speculated that it was to negotiate the
acquisition of Neuchaˆtel by the elector of Saxony,7 but it is more likely
that he was to facilitate renegotiation of a loan of 700,000 Reichsthaler
that Saxony had received from the city the year before. In fact, Vattel’s
stay in Berne lasted no longer than a few weeks.
For much of the next ten years Vattel remained in Neuchaˆtel. From
here he sent a stream of letters to Bru¨hl complaining of his ill health
and dire ﬁnancial circumstances. Nevertheless, this turned out to be the
most productive period of his life. In 1757 he published a further col-
lection of essays that included dialogues between Diogenes and Marcus
Aurelius and between Henry IV of France and his adviser Sully.8 Also
during this period he wrote his masterpiece, Droit des gens, which ap-
peared inNeuchaˆtelattheendof 1757,thoughthetitlepagesaysLondon
1758.9 The work quickly established Vattel as a major authority on nat-
5. Vattel, Pie`ces diverses, avec quelques lettres de morale et d’amusemens (Paris:Brias-
son, 1746).
6. Vattel, Le loisir philosophique ou Pie`ces diverses de philosophie, de morale, et
d’amusement (Gene`ve [in fact, Dresden]: Walther, 1747); see Be´guelin, “En souvenir
de Vattel,” 106n112.
7. Be´guelin, “En souvenir de Vattel,” 47.
8. Vattel, Poliergie ou me´lange de litte´rature et de poe¨sie (Amsterdam: Arksteˆe et
Merkus, 1757).
9. Vattel ﬁrst mentions the work in a letter to Bru¨hl from March 1758; see Be´-
guelin, “En souvenir de Vattel,” 131.


xii
introduction
ural jurisprudence.10 It also changed his personal situation. In 1759 the
elector of Saxony ﬁnally recalled Vattel to Dresden, appointed him to
the Privy Council, and made him chief adviser to the government of
Saxony on foreign affairs. During his stay at Dresden, Vattel published
twofurther works,Me´langesdelitte´rature,demorale,etdepolitique (1760,
reprinted in 1765 as Amusemens de litte´rature, de morale, et de politique)
and Questions de droit naturel et observations sur le traite´ du droitde nature
par le Baron de Wolf (1764), a detailed critique of Wolff’s Ius gentium
methodo scientiﬁca pertractatum that Vattel had completed already in
1753. In 1764 he married Marie de Cheˆne, the daughter of a Huguenot
noble family, with whom he had a son. Due to ill health, Vattel was
unable to cope with his ofﬁce and retired to his native Neuchaˆtel, where
he died in December 1767 at the age of ﬁfty-three.
Inﬂuence of Swiss Heritage
Although a subject of the king of Prussia by birth, and a servant of the
elector of Saxony by profession, Vattel was ﬁrst and foremost Swiss.
However, that description was more complicated in the eighteenth cen-
tury than it is today. What foreign observers often referred toastheSwiss
republic was in fact a loose federation of independent and highlydiverse
entities, some aristocratic, some democratic, some monarchical, all of
them small, some no bigger than a town. The federation was held to-
gether by fear of foreign aggression, a complex web of treaties, jointly
ruled territories, and military and trade agreements to contain conﬂict
betweenindividualcantons.AlthoughSwissthinkersfrequentlyinvoked
a universal society of nations, they remained highly suspicious of proj-
ects for perpetual peace in Europe, whether a benevolent hegemony or
a European federation. Instead, they saw their best chances of survival
in the more fragile order provided by a balance of power between large
commercial nations constantly in need of Swiss mercenaries for their
10. The numerous editions of The Law of Nations in French, English, German,
Spanish, and Italian are listed in Lapradelle, introduction, lvi–lix. To these shouldbe
added Greek, Russian, Polish, Chinese, and Japanese.


introduction
xiii
armies and Swiss investments for their public coffers. Swiss attachment
to state autonomy was so great that, during the 1750s and 1760s, a small
but highly vocal minority ﬂirted with Rousseau’s ideas of strict isola-
tionism as the only way to defend Swiss liberty from the aggressiveness
of modern commercial politics. Like Vattel, the majority of eighteenth-
century Swiss thinkers, however, saw clear military and cultural beneﬁts
in commercial progress and ridiculed Rousseau and his followers’ infat-
uation with the alleged virtuousness of ancient Sparta.11 They hoped to
adapt the humanist heritage of Swiss politics to the realities of a modern
economy by showing how new forms of Christian patriotism, assisted
by wide-reaching legislative reforms, were able to arrest and dissolve the
dangerously “unsocial” tendency of commercial states.12
Vattel’s Theory of Natural Law as
Applied to the Law of Nations
Againstthebackgroundof thisSwissdebate,wecanunderstandnotonly
Vattel’s vision of a workable European order but also the importance
he attributed to political economy for establishing and maintaining a
regime of international justice. In a famous passage, Vattel claimed that
commerce had transformed Europe from a “confused heap of detached
11. See especially Vattel’s “Re´ﬂexions sur le Discours de M. Rousseau touchant
l’origine de l’ine´galite´ parmi les hommes” (Amusemens de litte´rature, de morale, et de
politique, 79–89), where he attacked Rousseau’s elaborate critique of the idea of so-
ciability. Although Vattel, in The Law of Nations, does not mention Rousseau by
name, he repeatedly rejected arguments that contemporaries immediately associated
with the latter. See, for example, Preliminaries §10, where Vattel argued against the
Rousseauvian image of solitary natural man: “Each individual, moreover, is inti-
mately conscious that he can neither live happily nor improve his nature without the
intercourse and assistance of others.” See also bk. I, §113, where he defended the arts
and the sciences: “Let the friends of barbarism declaim against the sciencesandpolite
arts; let us, without deigning to answer their vain reasonings, content ourselves with
appealing to experience.”
12. For a discussion of mid-eighteenth-century Swiss reform discourse, see B. Ka-
possy, Iselin contra Rousseau: Sociable Patriotism and the History of Mankind. For the
wider European context of Vattel’s theory, see F. Stephen Ruddy, International Law
in the Enlightenment: The Background of Emmerich de Vattel’s “Le Droit des Gens.”


xiv
introduction
pieces” into a kind of large republic, where all members were united“for
the maintenance of order and liberty” (bk. III, §47). An “eternal and
immutable law of nature” obliged a state not only to respect and to treat
other states as equals but also to provide mutual aid “so far as that other
stands in real need of its assistance, and the former can grant it without
neglecting the duties it owes to itself” (bk. II, §3). Here Vattel claimed
to be following Christian Wolff who, in his Ius gentium methodo scien-
tiﬁca pertractatum, derived the duty to mutual aid fromanalogybetween
the state of nature and the realm of international relations: the law of
nations was simply the law of nature of individuals in the state of nature
applied to states (Prelim. §3–9). The primary duties of states were, ﬁrst,
to preserve and perfect themselves, and, second, to assist each other in
fulﬁlling those duties each state owed to itself. States should “cultivate
human society,” primarily through trade, as long as the development of
commerce did not conﬂict with their primary duties to themselves. Vat-
tel argued that states that acted upon the principles of natural law alone
would ultimately come to form a universal republic: “A real friendship
will be seen to reign among them; and this happy state consists in a
mutual affection” (bk. II, §12).
Although Vattel claimed that this “delightful dream” was derived di-
rectly from human nature, in The Law of Nations he acknowledgedthat
“most nations aim only to strengthen and enrich themselves at the ex-
pense of others” (bk. II, §16). Accordingly, prudence prevented existing
states from making mutual aid the guiding principle of foreign politics.
Instead, states ought to content themselves witha morallylessappealing,
but nevertheless workable, order based on the balance of power. Vattel
explained this acknowledgment of the realities of modern European
politics on two grounds. The ﬁrst was the theoretical incoherence of
previous natural law theories with regard to the duties of perfectly in-
dependent states. Here he turned against Wolff’s idea of a civitas max-
ima, as we will see.13 Vattel claimed that Wolff had rightlydistinguished
between two forms of the law of nations: ﬁrst, animmutableornecessary
13. N. Greenwood Onuf, “Civitas Maxima: Wolff, Vattel, and the Fate of Re-
publicanism,” American Journal of International Law 88 (1994): 280–303.


introduction
xv
law of nations, signifying the law of nature applied to individual states;
second, a voluntary law of nations, which deﬁned the necessary limi-
tations of natural law within the realm of international relations and
which, he argued, had to be tolerated in order to avoid greater harm.14
Although states, like individuals, were bound to assist others, this duty
was limited by the perfect right of a state to self-preservation. The im-
plication this had for trade was clear enough: while a state was obliged
to trade with all other states and sell its products at a “fair price,” con-
siderations of self-preservationallowedittolimititstrade,establishtrad-
ing companies, or even refuse commerce with another state altogether.
Wolff had also rightly recognized that since the law of nations applied
to all states in the same way, those states affected by tradesanctionscould
merely point out breaches of the necessary law of nations. Refusal to
trade, however, did not provide any legal groundforthecommencement
of military hostilities. The situation was different when a state was not
just incapable of self-preservation but lacked any resources to exchange
for vital goods. Here, the perfect right of preservation of a potential
donor nation was bound to clash with the equally perfect right of pres-
ervation of a state on the brink of starvation. It is in this context that
one needs to read Vattel’s often-cited justiﬁcation of the appropriation
of uncultivated land by European settlers in America.15
Given the increasingly economic dimension of European politics,
there was a constant danger that peaceful trade would be subjected to
the logic of warfare. Vattel’s main task in The Law of Nations was to de-
ﬁne as clearly as possible the limits individual states were allowed to im-
pose on freedom of trade. Wolff hoped to derive such understanding
from the image of a civitas maxima, a universal republic instituted by
nature, whose civil law was the expression of the right reason of civilized
nations. In the preface, Vattel rejected Wolff’s civitas maxima as ﬁcti-
tious and incompatible with the idea of state sovereignty (preface, 14).
While civil society could be said to be natural in that it originated in
14. For a detailed treatment of Vattel’s theory of international law, see Emman-
uelle Jouannet, Emer de Vattel et l’e´mergence doctrinale du droit internationalclassique.
15. Vattel, Law of Nations, I §81; II §86–87, 97; Questions, 71–72.


xvi
introduction
human need, no such thing could be said of the relation between sov-
ereign states: “I acknowledge no other natural society between nations
than that which nature has established between mankind in general”
(ibid.). In contrast to individuals, nations enjoyedgreaterautonomyand
because of this had no pressing reason to subject themselves to a higher
authority. Furthermore, their absolute liberty was necessary “properlyto
discharge the duties [the state] owes to herself and to her citizens”(pref-
ace, 15).
Vattel’s defenseof a naturallawof nationstogetherwithhisinsistence
on state sovereignty earned him a reputation for incoherence, the view
of Kant, or, as many international law theorists writing after the First
World War maintained, for being an unconditional supporter of reason
of state who “disguised his evil intentions through words of sublime
charity.”16 Although in The Law of Nations Vattel dealt with this issue
only in passing, he discussed it at length in several of his other writings,
notably his Essay on the Foundation of Natural Law and on the First Prin-
ciple of the Obligation Men Find Themselves Under toObserveLaws. Here
he sought to explain how humans could be under an obligation to nat-
ural law even in the absence of a punitive superior. Vattel’s main move,
primarily aimed at Jean Barbeyrac, was to derive obligation not from
any external source, but from what he claimed was man’s most basic
motive, namely self-loveand a desireforthehappinessof aperfectsoul.17
Ultimately it was from man’s obligation to himself to attain the highest
degree of happiness, which in turn required commerce with other ra-
tional beings, that the duty of mutual aid and friendship could be de-
rived.18 This also applied to the obedience citizens owed to the state:
16. C. Van Vollenhoven, Du droit de paix. De iure pacis, 99. See Emmanuelle
Jouannet, “La critique de la pense´e classique durant l’entre-deux guerres: Vattel et
Van Vollenhoven,” in Miskolc Journal of International Law 1 (2004): 45–63. Kant, in
his “Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch,” had famously labeled Vattel, together
with Grotius and Pufendorf, as “sorry comforters,” in Political Writings, 103. See also
R. Tuck, The Rights of War and Peace: Political Thought and the International Order
from Grotius to Kant, 191–96; and T. J. Hochstrasser, Natural Law Theories in the
Early Enlightenment, 177–83.
17. Vattel, Essay on the Foundation, 752.
18. See also Vattel’s essays on friendship from 1741 (see note 3, below).


introduction
xvii
“The love and affection a man feels for the state of whichheisa member,
is a necessary consequence of the wise and rational love he owes to him-
self, since his own happiness is connected with that of his country”
(bk. I, §120). In The Law of Nations Vattel used the same argumentwith
regard to states. As in the case of individuals, a nation’s duty of self-
preservation and of self-perfection could be derived only from its basic
self-interest and its desire to attain the highest level of national happi-
ness. Moreover, like individuals, nations could attain nationalhappiness
only by developing more enlightened forms of self-interest, forms that
took into account the well-being of other nations.19 Vattel claimed that
the highest degree of national happiness consisted in “true glory” (bk. I,
§§186–88). It was acquired through the positive reputation a state en-
joyed among well-intentioned nations, and through the respect it re-
ceived from those seeking to violate the laws of nations. A truly glorious
nation, Vattel hoped, would set an example others would wish to em-
ulate. In so doing, it would gradually shift the pathological rivalry be-
tween statesinthedirectionof asystembasedonvirtuouscompetition.20
As a further measure for reducing the tensions between self-
preservation and mutual aid, Vattel called upon European rulers and
their ministers to implement a wide range of legislative reforms that
would allow modern nations to break out of the vicious cycle of public
borrowingandtaxationandtocreateahealthierbalancebetweenincome
and expenditure (bk. I, §183). Instead of relying on the distributiveeffect
of luxury and conspicuous consumption, rulers should initiate a new
culture of virtuous moderation and encourage agriculture so as to pro-
cure “abundance in every thing” (bk. I, §73).21 Although he accepted
19. Note the revealing subtitle added to the pirated edition (Leyden, 1758), which
suggested that Vattel’s treatise should be read as “a work tending to display the true
interest of powers.” This additional subtitle seems to have been included only in the
German edition of 1760, the ﬁrst English translation of 1759, and the second Amer-
ican edition of 1805.
20. Vattel dealt with the distinction between true and false glory at length in his
“Dialogue entre Pierre le Grand & Charles XII sur la gloire des conque´rans,” pub-
lished in the Amusemens de litte´rature (La Haye: Pierre Gosse, 1765), 1–19.
21. See Vattel’s essay Dialogue entre le prince de **** & son conﬁdent, sur quelques
parties essentielles de l’administration publique, reproduced in this edition, p. 783.


xviii
introduction
certain protectionist measures with regard to foreign trade, Vattel in-
sisted that states should intervene as little as possible in the domestic
economy and grant individual citizens the maximum amount of natural
liberty: “Liberty is the soul of abilities and industry” (bk. I, §74). He
also expressly recommended the role of learned societies for the dissem-
ination of technological know-how (bk. I, §76). Vattel believed that of
all modern nations Britain had come closest to implementing a system
worthy of emulation, and in The Law of Nations he repeatedly singled
it out as an example for the rest of Europe, not only with regard to its
economy but also with respect to its “admirable constitution.” In con-
trast with the constitutions of patrimonial states, Britain allowed its cit-
izens to recognize themselves as part of both the nation andtheuniversal
society of men (bk. I, §24).22
Contemporaries would haverecognizedVattel’sstanceonperhapsthe
central issue of European politics at the time: whether Britain or France
would prove the stronger in the international rivalry for supremacy. In
supporting Britain’s advocacy of an ongoing European balance of
power, rather than French hegemony on mainland Europe that was as-
sociated with the peace projects of the Abbe´ de Saint-Pierre and Victor
Riqueti de Mirabeau, Vattel was taking a stand on the domestic stability
of mixed government as much as he was on the consequences of such
a polity for international affairs. In advocating mixed government in
commercial monarchies he was going against the grain of the majority
of writers, such as Montesquieu and Rousseau, for whom Britain’s
mixed government, with its parties, corruption, and factions, repre-
sented an institutionalization of civil war domestically that would have
dire consequences if transposed into the dominant form of state inter-
nationally. Praise of Britain also allowed Vattel to emphasize the greater
modernity of Protestant states by contrast with the backwardness of
the religious, moral, and economic practices that he associated with
Catholicism. In an openly polemical fashion, Vattel often linked such
backwardness with reason of state, or amoral policy, in the international
22. On Vattel’s critique of the patrimonial state, see Frederick G. Whelan, “Vat-
tel’s Doctrine of the State,” History of Political Thought, 9 (1988): 59–90.


introduction
xix
sphere and was always ready to provide examples of the violation of
natural law from the history of the papacy. Catholic writers were, how-
ever, willing to use Vattel for his broader arguments about the indepen-
dence of small states. One key example is Cardinal Consalvi at the
Congress of Vienna, who employed Vattel’s arguments to justify the
sovereignty of the Vatican over the papal states.
Vattel was convinced that if Britain played a more active role in the
relations between European states, French aspirations to universalmon-
archy would be countered. This was expected in turn to safeguard the
sovereignty of the smaller states, and especially the Swiss republics, the
legitimacy of whose existence was increasingly questioned as public
credit allowed the larger monarchies to employ mercenary armies too
strong for the old republics, however great their republican valor and
virtue. Vattel’s case for the survival of small states in the modern world
is one of his main themes, especially in The Law of Nations. Vattel’s
association of the law of nations with the defense of small states against
more powerful neighbors was illustrated in February 1758,afterthePrus-
sian army had destroyed castles belonging to the duke of Saxony. Vattel
announced to Bru¨hl that his recently published work proved the legit-
imacy of Saxony’s complaints and also showed that “all powers are
obligedtouniteandpunishtheonewhowishestointroducesuchwicked
customs.”23 Prussia should be held accountable, he explained in a letter
addressed to the avoyer24 and Small Council of Berne, for violating the
established rules of war that permitted armed conﬂictonly asalastresort
after all diplomatic options had been exhausted. Given that Saxony had
not only disarmed but even granted passage to Prussian troops, Fried-
rich’s systematic plundering of Saxony’s riches and forced enlistmentof
the “entire ﬂower of youth”—a practice that Vattel described as being
without precedent among Christian princes—threatened the very pos-
sibility of peaceful coexistence among European nations.25
23. Be´guelin, “En souvenir de Vattel,” 131; see Law of Nations, III §168.
24. Berne’s chief magistrate.
25. Be´guelin, “En souvenir de Vattel,” 172.


xx
introduction
chapter ii
87
taining the political association. The entire nation is then obliged to
maintain that association; and as their preservation depends on its con-
tinuance, it thence follows that every nation is obliged to perform the
duty of self-preservation.
This obligation, so natural to each individual of God’s creation, is
not derived to nations immediately from nature,butfromtheagreement
by which civil society is formed: it is therefore not absolute, but con-
ditional,—that is to say, it supposes a human act, to wit, the social com-
pact. And as compacts may be dissolved by common consent of the
parties,—if the individuals that compose a nation should unanimously
agree to break the link that binds them, it would be lawful for them to
do so, and thus to destroy the state or nation; but they would doubtless
incur a degree of guilt, if they took this step without just and weighty
reasons; for civil societies are approved by the Law of Nature, which
recommends them to mankind, as the true means of supplying all their
wants, and of effectually advancing towards theirownperfection.More-
over civil society is so useful, nay so necessary to all citizens, that it may
well be considered as morally impossible for them to consent unani-
mously to break it without necessity. But what citizens may or ought to
do,—what the majority of them may resolveincertaincasesof necessity,
or of pressing exigency,—are questions that will be treated of elsewhere:
they cannot be solidly determined without some principles which we
have not yet established. For the present, it is sufﬁcient to have proved,
that, in general, as long as the political society subsists, the whole nation
is obliged to endeavour to maintain it.
If a nation is obliged to preserve itself, it is no less obliged carefully
to preserve all its members. The nation owes this to itself, since the loss
even of one of its members weakens it, and <6> is injurious to its pres-
ervation. It owes this also to the members in particular, in consequence
of the very act of association; for those who compose a nation areunited
for their defence and common advantage; and none can justly be de-
prived of this union, and of the advantages he expects to derive from it,
while he on his side fulﬁls the conditions.
The body of a nation cannot then abandon a province, a town, or
even a single individual who is a part of it, unless compelled to it by
§17. And to
preserve its
members.


88
book i: nations in themselves
necessity, or indispensably obliged to it by the strongest reasonsfounded
on the public safety.
Since then a nation is obliged to preserve itself, it has a right to every
thing necessary for its preservation. For the Law of Nature gives us a
right to every thing, without which we cannot fulﬁl our obligation; oth-
erwise it would oblige ustodoimpossibilities,orratherwouldcontradict
itself in prescribing us a duty, and at the same time debarring us of the
only means of fulﬁlling it. It will doubtless be here understood, that
those means ought not to be unjust in themselves, or such as are abso-
lutely forbidden by the Law of Nature. As it is impossible that it should
ever permit the use of such means,—if on a particular occasionnoother
present themselves for fulﬁlling a general obligation, the obligation
must, in that particular instance, be looked on as impossible, and con-
sequently void.
By an evident consequence from what has been said, a nation ought
carefully to avoid, as much as possible, whatever might cause its destruc-
tion, or that of the state, which is the same thing.
A nation or state has a right to every thing that can help to ward off
imminent danger, and keep at a distance whatever is capable of causing
its ruin; and that from the very same reasons that establish its right to
the things necessary to its preservation.
The second general duty of a nation towards itself is to labour at its
own perfection and that of its state. It is this double perfection that ren-
ders a nation capable of attaining the end of civil society: it would be
absurd to unite in society, and yet not endeavour to promote the end of
that union.
Here the entire body of a nation, and each individual citizen, are
bound by a double obligation, the one immediately proceeding from
nature, and the other resulting from their reciprocal engagements. Na-
ture lays an obligation upon each man to labour after hisownperfection;
and in so doing, he labours after that of civil society, which could not
fail to be very ﬂourishing, were it composed of none but good citizens.
But the individual ﬁnding in a well regulated society the most powerful
succours to enable him to fulﬁl the task which Nature imposes upon
§18. A nation
has a right to
every thing
necessary
for its pres-
ervation.
§19. It ought
to avoid every
thing that
might occasion
its destruction.
§20. Of its
right to every
thing that may
promote this
end.
§21. A nation
ought to
perfect itself
and the state.


chapter ii
89
him in relation to himself, for becoming better, and consequently more
happy,—he is doubtless obliged to contribute all in his power to render
that society more perfect.
All the citizens who form a political society, reciprocally en-<7>gage
to advance the common welfare, and as far as possible to promote the
advantage of each member. Since then the perfection of the society is
what enables it to secure equally the happiness of the body and that of
the members, thegrandobjectof theengagementsanddutiesof acitizen
is to aim at this perfection. This is more particularly the duty of thebody
collective in all their common deliberations, and in every thing they do
as a body.
A nation therefore ought to prevent, and carefully to avoid, whatever
may hinder its perfection and that of the state, or retard the progress
either of the one or the other.
We may then conclude, as we have done above in regard to the pres-
ervation of a state (§18), that a nation has a right to every thing without
which it cannot attain the perfection of the members and of the state,
or prevent and repel whatever is contrary to this double perfection.
On this subject, the English furnish us an example highly worthy of
attention. That illustrious nation distinguishes itself in a glorious man-
ner by its application to every thing that can render the state more ﬂour-
ishing. An admirable constitution there places every citizeninasituation
that enables him to contribute to this greatend, andevery-wherediffuses
that spirit of genuinepatriotismwhichzealouslyexertsitself forthepub-
lic welfare. We there see private citizens form considerable enterprises,
in order to promote the glory and welfare of the nation. And while a
bad prince would ﬁnd his hands tied up, a wise and moderate king ﬁnds
the most powerful aids to give success to his glorious designs.Thenobles
and the representatives of the people form a link of conﬁdence between
the monarch and the nation, and, concurring with him in every thing
that tends to promote the public welfare, partly ease him of the burden
of government,givestabilitytohispower,andprocurehimanobedience
the more perfect, as it is voluntary. Every good citizen sees that the
strength of the state is really the advantage of all, and not that of a single
§22. And to
avoid every
thing con-
trary to its
perfection.
§23. The
rights it
derives
from these
obligations.
§24. Examples.

90
book i: nations in themselves
person.6 Happy constitution! which they did not suddenly obtain: it has
cost rivers of blood; but they have not purchased it too dear. Mayluxury,
that pest so fatal to the manly and patriotic virtues, that minister of
corruption so dangerous to liberty, never overthrow a monument that
does so much honour to human nature—a monument capableof teach-
ing kings how glorious it is to rule over a free people!7
There is another nation illustrious by its bravery and its victories.8 Its
numerous and valiantnobility, itsextensiveandfertiledominions,might
render it respectable throughout all Europe, and in a short time it might
be in a most ﬂourishing situation. But its constitution opposes this; and
such is its attachmenttothatconstitution,thatthereisnoroomtoexpect
a proper remedy willeverbeapplied.Invainmightamagnanimousking,
raised by his virtues above the pursuits of ambition and injustice, form
the most salutary designs for promoting the happiness of <8> his peo-
ple;—in vain might those designs be approved by the more sensiblepart,
by the majority of the nation;—a single deputy, obstinate or corrupted
by a foreign power, might put a stop to all, and disconcert the wisest and
most necessary measures. From an excessive jealousy of its liberty, that
nation has taken such precautions as must necessarily place it out of the
power of the king to make any attempts on the liberties of the public.
But is it not evident that those precautions exceed the end proposed,—
that they tie the hands of the most just and wise prince, and deprivehim
of the means of securing the public freedom against the enterprises of
foreign powers, and of rendering the nation rich and happy? Is it not
evident that the nation has deprived itself of the power of acting, and
6. In his editions from 1834 Joseph Chitty here noted: “This is indeed a ﬂattering
compliment from Vattel, a foreigner: but certainly it is just: for although, as a com-
mercial nation, it might be supposed that each individual principally labours for his
own individual gain; yet when we refer to the spirited employment of capital: build-
ing national bridges, canals, rail-roads, &c not yielding even 2 per cent, it must be
admitted that great public spirit for national good very generally prevails.”
7. Vattel is here positioning himself in the debate about the relative merits of
Britain and of France, and the vexed question of Britain’s likelyprospectsforsurvival
as a mixed state.
8. Vattel is discussing France.
chapter ii
657
lay it before the parliament, in order that they may be certain of the
concurrence of that assembly to enable them to make good their en-
gagements. When the emperor Charles V. required of Francis the First,
his prisoner, such conditions as that king could not grant without the
consent of the nation, he should have detained him tillthestates-general
of France had ratiﬁed the treaty of Madrid,4 and Burgundy had acqui-
esced in it: thus he would not have lost the fruits of his victory by an
oversight which appears very surprising in a prince of his abilities.
We shall not here repeat what we have said on a former occasion con-
cerning the alienation of a part of the state (Book I. §§263, &c.), or of
the whole state (ibid. §§68, &c.). We shall therefore content ourselves
with observing, that, in case of a pressing necessity, such as is produced
by the events of an unfortunate war, the alienations made by the prince
in order to save the remainder of the state, are considered as approved
and ratiﬁed by the mere silence of the nation, when she has not, in the
form of her government, retained some easy and ordinary method of
giving her express consent, and has lodged an absolute power in the
prince’s hands. The states-general are abolished in France by disuse and
by the tacit consent of the nation. Whenever, therefore, that kingdom
is reduced to any calamitous exigency, it belongs to the king alone to
determine by <434> what sacriﬁces he may purchase peace: and his en-
emies will treat with him on a sure footing. It would be a vain plea on
the partof thepeople,tosaythatitwasonlythroughfeartheyacquiesced
in the abolition of the states-general. The fact is that they did acquiesce,
and thereby suffered the king to acquire all the powers necessaryforcon-
tracting with foreign states in the name of the nation. In everystatethere
must necessarily be some power with which other nations may treat on
secure grounds. A certain historian*says,that,“bythefundamentallaws,
the kingsof Francecannot,totheprejudiceof theirsuccessors,renounce
any of their rights, by any treaty, whethervoluntaryorcompulsory.”The
fundamental laws may indeed with-hold from the king the power of
* The abbe´ de Choisy, Hist. de Charles V. p. 492.
4. King Francis I of France (r. 1515–47) signed the Treaty of Madrid in 1526.
§11. Aliena-
tions made
by a treaty
of peace.


658
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
alienating, without the nation’s consent, what belongs to the state; but
they cannot invalidate an alienationor renunciationmadewiththatcon-
sent.* And if the nation has permitted matters toproceedtosuchlengths
that she now has no longer any means of expressly declaringherconsent,
her silence alone, on such occasions, is in reality a tacit consent. Oth-
erwise there would be no possibility of treating on sure grounds with
such a state: and her pretending thus beforehand to invalidate all future
treaties, would be an infringement of the law of nations, which ordains
that all states should retain the means of treating with each other (Book
I. §262), and should observe their treaties (Book II. §§163, 269, &c.).
It is to be observed, however, that, in our examination whether the
consent of the nation be requisite for alienating any part of the state,
we mean such parts as are still in the nation’s possession, and not those
which have fallen into the enemy’s hands during the course of the war:
for, as these latter are no longer possessed by thenation,itisthesovereign
alone, if invested with the full and absolute administration of the gov-
ernment, and with the power of making war and peace,—it is he alone,
I say, who is to judge whether it be expedient to relinquish those parts
of the state, or to continue the war for the recovery of them. And even
though it should be pretended that he cannot by his ownsingleauthority
make any valid alienation of them,—he has, nevertheless, according to
our supposition, that is, if invested with full and absolute power,—he
has, I say, a right to promise that the nation shall never again take up
arms for the recovery of those lands, towns, or provinces, which he re-
linquishes: and this sufﬁces for securing the quiet possession of them to
the enemy into whose hands they are fallen. <435>
* The renunciation made by Anne of Austria, consort of Louis the Thirteenth,
was good and valid, because it was conﬁrmed by the general assembly of the cortes,
and registered in all the ofﬁces. The case was otherwise with that made by Maria
Theresa, which was not sanctioned by those formalities,—consequently,notstamped
with the national approbation, and the character of a law of the state. The cardinals
who examined this affair by order of the pope, whom Charles II. had consulted,paid
no regard to Maria Theresa’s renunciation, as not deeming it of sufﬁcient force to
invalidate the laws of the country, and to supersede the established custom.Memoirs
of M. de St. Philippe[[SanFelipe]],vol.i.p. 29.[[Noteaddedin1773/1797editions.]]


chapter ii
659
The necessity of making peace authorises the sovereign to dispose of
the property of individuals; and the eminent domain gives him a right
to do it (Book I. §244). He may even, to a certain degree, disposeof their
persons, by virtue of the power which he has over all his subjects. But
as it is for the public advantage that he thus disposes of them, the state
is bound to indemnify the citizens who are sufferers by the transaction
(ibid.).
Every impediment by which the prince is disabled from administer-
ing the affairs of government, undoubtedly deprives him of the power
of making peace. Thus a king cannot make a treaty of peace during his
minority, or while in a state of mental derangement: this assertion does
not stand in need of any proof: but the question is, whether a king can
conclude a peace while he is a prisoner of war, and whether the treaty
thus made be valid? Some celebrated authors* here draw a distinction
between a monarch whose kingdom is patrimonial, and another who
has only the usufructus of his dominions. We think wehaveover-thrown
that false and dangerous idea of a patrimonial kingdom (Book I. §§68,
&c.), and evidently shewn that the notion ought not to be extended
beyond the bare power with which a sovereign is sometimes intrusted,
of nominating his successor, of appointing a new prince to rule over the
state, and dismembering some parts of it, if he thinks it expedient;—
the whole, however, to be uniformly done for the good of the nation,
and with a view to her greater advantage. Every legitimate government,
whatever it be, is established solely for the good and welfare of the state.
This incontestable principle being once laid down, the making of peace
is no longer the peculiar province of the king; it belongs to the nation.
Now it is certain that a captive prince cannot administer the govern-
ment, or attend to the management of public affairs. How shall he who
is not free command a nation? How can he govern it in such manner as
best to promote the advantage of the people, and the public welfare?He
does not indeed forfeit his rights; but his captivity deprives him of the
power of exercising them, as he is not in a condition to direct the use
of them to its proper and legitimate end. He stands in the same predic-
* See Wolf, Jus Gent. §982.
§12. How the
sovereign may
in a treaty
dispose of
what concerns
individuals.
§13. Whether
a king, being
a prisoner of
war, can make
peace.

660
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
ament as a king in his minority, or labouring under a derangement of
his mental faculties. In such circumstances, it is necessarythattheperson
or persons whom the laws of the state designate for the regency, should
assume the reins of government. To them it belongs to treat of peace,
to settle the terms on which it shall be made, and to bring it to a con-
clusion, in conformity to the laws.
The captive sovereign may himself negotiate the peace, and promise
what personally depends on him: but the treaty does not become oblig-
atory on the nation till ratiﬁed by herself, or by those who are invested
with the public authority during the <436> prince’s captivity, or, ﬁnally,
by the sovereign himself after his release.
But, if it is a duty incumbent on the state to use her best efforts for
procuring the release of the most inconsiderable of her citizens who has
lost his liberty in the public cause, the obligation is much stronger in the
case of her sovereign, whose cares, attention, and labours, are devoted
to the common safety and welfare. It was in ﬁghting for his people, that
the prince who has been made prisoner, fell into that situation, which,
to a person of his exalted rank, must be wretched in the extreme: and
shall that very people hesitate to deliver him at the expense of thegreat-
est sacriﬁces? On so melancholy an occasion, they should not demur
at any thing short of the very existence of the state. But, in every ex-
igency, the safety of the people is the supreme law; and, in so severe an
extremity, a generous prince will imitate the example of Regulus. That
heroic citizen, being sent back to Rome on his parole, dissuaded the
Romans from purchasing his release by an inglorious treaty, though he
was not ignorant of the tortures prepared for him by the cruelty of the
Carthaginians.*
When an unjust conqueror, or any other usurper, has invaded the
kingdom, he becomes possessed of all the powers of government when
once the people have submitted to him, and, by a voluntary homage,
acknowledged him as their sovereign. Other states, as having no right to
intermeddle with the domestic concerns of that nation, or to interfere
in her government, are bound to abide by her decision, and to look no
* See Tit. Liv. epitom. lib. xviii and other historians.
§14. Whether
peace can be
made with a
usurper.
chapter ii
661
farther than the circumstance of actual possession. They may therefore
broach and conclude a treaty of peace with the usurper. They do not
thereby infringe the right of the lawful sovereign:—it is not their busi-
ness to examine and judge of that right: they leave it as it is, and only
look to the possession, in all the affairs they have to transact with that
kingdom, pursuant to their own rights and those of the nation whose
sovereignty is contested. But this rule does not preclude them from es-
pousing the quarrel of the dethroned monarch, and assisting him, if he
appears to have justice on his side: they then declare themselves enemies
of the nation which has acknowledged his rival, as, when two different
states are at war, they are at liberty toassisteitherpartywhosepretensions
appear to be best founded.
The principal in the war, the sovereign in whose name it has been
carried on, cannot justly make a peace without including his allies,—I
mean those who have given him assistance without directly taking part
in the war. This precaution is necessary in order to secure them from the
resentment of the enemy: for though the latter has no right to take of-
fence against his adversary’s allies, whose engagements were purely of a
defensive nature, and who have done nothing more than faithfully exe-
cute their <437> treaties (Book III. §101)—yet it too frequentlyhappens
that the conduct of men is inﬂuenced by their passions rather than by
justice and reason. If the alliance was not of prior date to the com-
mencement of the war, and was formed with a view to that very war,—
although these new allies do not engage in the contestwithalltheirforce,
nor directly as principals, they nevertheless give to the prince against
whom they have joined, just cause to treat them as enemies. The sov-
ereign, therefore, whom they have assisted, must not omit including
them in the peace.
But the treaty concluded by the principal is no farther obligatory on
his allies than as they are willing to accede to it, unless they have given
him full power to treat for them. By including them in his treaty, heonly
acquires a right, with respect to his reconciled enemy, of insisting that
he shall not attack those allies on account of the succours they have fur-
nished against him,—that he shall not molest them, but shall live in
peace with them as if nothing had happened.
§15. Allies
included in the
treaty of
peace.


662
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
Sovereigns who have associated in a war,—all those who have directly
taken part in it,—are respectively to make their treaties of peace, each
for himself. Such was the mode adopted at Nimeguen, at Ryswick, and
at Utrecht.5 But the alliance obliges them to treat in concert. To deter-
mine in what cases an associate may detach himself from the alliance,
and make a separate peace, is a question which we have examined in
treating of associations in war (Book III. Chap. VI.), and of alliances in
general (Book II. Chap. XII. and XV.).
It frequently happens that two nations, though equally tired of the
war, do nevertheless continue it merely from a fear of making the ﬁrst
advances to an accommodation, as these might be imputed to weakness;
or they persist in it from animosity, and contrary to their real interests.
On such occasions, some common friends of the parties effectually in-
terpose by offering themselves as mediators. There cannot be a more
beneﬁcent ofﬁce, and more becoming a great prince, than that of rec-
onciling two nations at war, and thus putting a stop to the effusion of
human blood: it is the indispensable duty of those who have the means
of performing it with success. This is the only reﬂection we shall here
make on a subject we have already discussed (Book II. §328).
A treaty of peace can be no more than a compromise. Were the rules
of strict and rigid justice to be observed in it, so that each party should
precisely receive every thing to which he has a just title, it would be
impossible ever to make a peace. First, with regard to the very subject
which occasioned the war, one of the parties would be under a necessity
of acknowledging himself in the wrong, and condemning his own un-
just pretensions; which he will hardly do, unless reduced to the last ex-
tremity. But if he owns the injustice of his cause, he must at the same
time condemn every measure he has pursued in support of it: he must
restore what he has unjustly taken, must reimburse the expenses of the
war, and repair the damages. And how can a just <438> estimate of all
the damages be formed? What price can be set on all the blood that has
been shed, the loss of such a number of citizens,andtheruinof families?
Nor is this all. Strict justice would further demand, that the author of
5. Nimeguen, 1678–79; Ryswick, 1697; Utrecht, 1713.
§16. Associates
to treat, each
for himself.
§17.
Mediation.
§18. On what
footing peace
may be
concluded.


chapter ii
663
an unjust war should suffer a penalty proportioned to the injuries for
which he owes satisfaction, and such as might ensure the future safety
of him whom he has attacked. How shall the nature of that penalty be
determined, and the degree of it be precisely regulated? In ﬁne, even he
who had justice on his side, may have transgressed the bounds of jus-
tiﬁable self-defence, and been guilty of improper excesses in the prose-
cution of a war whose object was originally lawful: herethen aresomany
wrongs, of which strict justice would demand reparation. He may have
made conquests and taken booty beyond the value of his claim. Who
shall make an exact calculation, a just estimate of this? Since, therefore,
it would be dreadful to perpetuate the war, or to pursue it to the utter
ruin of one of the parties,—and since, however just the cause in which
we are engaged, we must at length turn our thoughts towards the res-
toration of peace, and ought to direct all our measures to the attainment
of that salutary object,—no other expedient remains than that of com-
ing to a compromise respecting all claims and grievances on both sides,
and putting an end to all disputes, by a convention as fair and equitable
as circumstances will admit of. In such convention no decision is pro-
nounced on the original cause of the war, or on those controversies to
which the various acts of hostility might give rise; nor is either of the
parties condemned as unjust,—a condemnation to which few princes
would submit;—but, a simple agreement is formed, which determines
whatequivalenteachpartyshallreceiveinextinctionof allhispretensions.
The effect of the treaty of peace is to put an end to the war, and to
abolish the subject of it. It leaves the contracting parties norighttocom-
mit any acts of hostility on account either of the subject itself which
had given rise to the war, or of any thing that was done during its con-
tinuance: wherefore they cannot lawfully take uparmsagainforthesame
subject. Accordingly, in such treaties, the contractingpartiesreciprocally
engage to preserve perpetual peace: which is not to be understood as if
they promised never to make war on each other for any cause whatever.
The peace in question relates to the war which it terminates: and it is in
reality perpetual, inasmuch as it does not allow them to revive the same
war by taking up arms again for the same subject which had originally
given birth to it.
§19. General
effect of the
treaty of
peace.


664
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
A special compromise, however, only extinguishes the particular
means to which it relates, and does not preclude any subsequent pre-
tensions to the object itself, on other grounds. Care is therefore usually
taken to require a general compromise, which shall embrace not only
the existing controversy, but the very thing itself which is the subject of
that controversy: stipulation is made for a general renunciation of all
pretensions what-<439>ever tothethinginquestion:andthus,although
the party renouncing might in the sequel be able to demonstrate by new
reasons that the thing did really belong to him, his claim would not be
admitted.
An amnesty is a perfect oblivion of the past; and the end of peace
being to extinguish all subjects of discord, this should be the leading
article of the treaty: and accordingly, such is at presenttheconstantprac-
tice. But though the treaty should be wholly silent on this head, the
amnesty, by the very nature of peace, is necessarily implied in it.
As each of the belligerent powers maintains that he has justice on his
side,—and as their pretensions are not liable to be judged by others
(Book III. §188)—whatever state things happen to be in at the time of
the treaty, is to be considered as their legitimate state; and if the parties
intend to make any change in it, they must expressly specify it in the
treaty. Consequently all things not mentioned in the treaty are to remain
on the same footing on which they stand at the period when it is con-
cluded. This is also a consequence of the promised amnesty.Alldamages
caused during the war are likewise buried in oblivion; and no action can
be brought for those of which the treaty does not stipulate the repara-
tion: they are considered as having never happened.
But the effect of the compromise or amnesty cannot be extended to
things which have no relation to the war that is terminated by the treaty.
Thus, claims founded on a debt, or on an injury which had been done
prior to the war, but which made no part of the reasons for undertaking
it, still stand on their former footing, and are not abolished by the treaty,
unless it be expressly extended to the extinction of every claimwhatever.
The case is the same with debts contracted during the war, but forcauses
which have no relation to it,—or with injuries done during its contin-
uance, but which have no connection with the state of warfare.
§20. Amnesty.
§21. Things
not mentioned
in the treaty.
§22. Things
not included
in the com-
promise or
amnesty.


chapter iii
665
Debts contracted with individuals, or injuries which they may have
received from any other quarter, without relation to the war, are likewise
not abolished by the compromise and amnesty, as these solely relate to
their own particular object,—that is to say, to the war, its causes, and its
effects. Thus, if two subjects of the belligerent powers make a contract
together in aneutralcountry,—orif theonetherereceivesaninjuryfrom
the other,—the performance of the contract, or the reparation of the
injury and damage, may be prosecuted after the conclusion of the treaty
of peace.
Finally, if the treaty expresses that all things shall be restored to the
state in which they were before the war, this clause is understoodtorelate
only to immovable possessions, and cannot be extended to movables, or
booty, which immediately becomes the property of the captors, and is
looked on as relinquished by the former owners on account of the dif-
ﬁculty of recognising it, and the little hope they entertain of ever re-
covering it. <440>
When the last-made treaty mentions and conﬁrms other treaties of
prior date, these constitute a part of the new one, no less than if they
were literally transcribed and included in it: and any new articlesrelating
to former conventions are to be interpreted according to the rules which
wehave laid down in aprecedingpartof thiswork(BookII.Chap.XVII.
and particularly §286).
chapter iii
Of the Execution of the Treaty of Peace.
A treaty of peace becomes obligatory on the contracting partiesfromthe
moment of its conclusion,—the moment it has passed through all the
necessary forms; and they are bound to have it carried into execution
without delay.* From that instant all hostilities must cease, unless a par-
* It is an essential point, to neglect none of the formalities which can ensure the
execution of the treaty, and prevent new disputes. Accordingly, care must be taken
to have it duly recorded in all the proper ofﬁces and courts. M. Van Beuningen,
§23. Former
treaties, men-
tioned and
conﬁrmed in
the new, are
a part of it.
§24. When the
obligation of
the treaty
commences.

666
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
ticular day has been speciﬁed for the commencement of the peace. But
this treaty does not bind the subjects until it is duly notiﬁed to them.
The case is the same in this instance, as in that of a truce (Book II. §239).
If it should happen that military men, acting within the extent of their
functions and pursuant to the rules of their duty, commit any acts of
hostility before they have authentic information of the treaty of peace,
it is a misfortune, for which they are not punishable: but the sovereign,
on whom the treaty of peace is already obligatory, is bound to order and
enforce the restitution of all captures made subsequent toitsconclusion:
he has no right whatever to retain them.
And in order to prevent those unhappy accidents, by which many
innocent persons may lose their lives, public notice of the peace is to be
given without delay, at least to the troops. But at present, as the body of
the people cannot of themselves undertake any act of hostility, and do
not personally engage in the war, the solemn proclamation of the peace
may be deferred, provided that care be taken to put a stop to all hostil-
ities; which is easily done by means of the generals who direct the opera-
tions, or by proclaiminganarmisticeattheheadof thearmies.Thepeace
of 1735, between the emperor and France,6 was not <441> proclaimed
till long after. The proclamation was postponed till the treaty was di-
gested at leisure,—the most important points having been already ad-
justed in the preliminaries. The publication of the peace replaces the
two nations in the state they were in before the war. It again opens a free
writing to the Grand Pensionary De Witt in 1662, thus observes—“The articles and
conditions of this alliance contain various matters of different natures, the majority
of which fall under the cognisance of the privy council,—several, under that of the
admiralty,—others, under that of the civil tribunals, the parliaments, &c.—escheat-
age, for instance, which comes under the cognisance of the chambre des comptes
[exchequer]. Thus the treaty must be recorded in all those different places.” This ad-
vice was followed; and the states general required that the treaty concluded the same
year should be recorded in all the parliaments of the kingdom. See the king’s reply
on this subject, in his letter to the count D’Estrades, page 399. [[Note added in 1773/
1797 editions.]]
6. Louis XV of France supported Stanislaw Leszcyn´ski’s compaign to return to
the Polish throne, inaugurating the War of the Polish Succession (1733–38) against
Emperor Charles VI and Russia.
§25. Publica-
tion of the
peace.


chapter iii
667
intercourse between them, and reinstates the subjects on both sides in
the enjoyment of those mutual privileges which the state of war had
suspended. On the publication, the treaty becomes a law to the subjects;
and they are thenceforward bound to conform to the regulations stip-
ulated therein. If, for instance, the treaty imports that one of the two
nations shall abstain from a particular branch of commerce, every sub-
ject of that nation, from the time of the treaty’s being made public, is
obliged to renounce that commerce.
When no particular time has been assigned for the execution of the
treaty, and the performance of the several articles, common sense dic-
tates that every point should be carried into effect as soon as possible:
and it was, no doubt, in this light that the contractingpartiesunderstood
the matter. The faith of treaties equally forbids all neglect, tardiness,and
studied delays, in the execution of them.
But in this affair, as in every other, a legitimate excuse, founded on a
real and insurmountable obstacle, is to be admitted; fornobodyisbound
to perform impossibilities. The obstacle, when it does not arise fromany
fault on the side of the promising party, vacates a promise which cannot
be made good by an equivalent, and of which the performance cannot
be deferred to another time. If the promise can be fulﬁlled on another
occasion, a suitable prolongation of the term must be allowed. Suppose
one of the contracting nations has, by the treaty of peace, promised the
other a body of auxiliary troops: she will not be bound to furnish them,
if she happen to stand in urgent need of them for her own defence.
Suppose she has promised a certain yearly quantity of corn: it cannot
be demanded at a time when she herself labours under a scarcity of pro-
visions: but, on the return of plenty, she is bound to make good the
quantity in arrear, if required.
It is further held as a maxim, that the promiser is absolved from his
promise, when, after he has made his preparations for performing it ac-
cording to the tenor of his engagement, he is prevented from fulﬁlling
it, by the party himself to whom it was made. The promisee is deemed
to dispense with the fulﬁlment of a promise, of which he himself ob-
structs the execution. Let us therefore add, that if he who had promised
a thing by a treaty of peace, was ready to perform it at the time agreed
§26. Time of
the execution.
§27. A lawful
excuse to be
admitted.
§28. The
promise is void
when the party
to whom it was
made, has him-
self hindered
the perfor-
mance of it.


668
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
on, or immediately and at a proper time if there was no ﬁxed term,—
and the other party would not admit of it, the promiser is discharged
from his promise: forthepromisee,nothavingreservedtohimself aright
to regulate the performance of it at his own pleasure, is accounted to
renounce it by not accepting of it <442> in proper season and at the
time for which the promise was made. Should he desire that the per-
formance be deferred till another time, the promiser is in honour bound
to consent to the prolongation, unless he can shew, by very goodreasons,
that the promise would then become more inconvenient to him.
To levy contributions is an act of hostility which ought to cease as
soon as peace is concluded (§24). Those which are already promised,but
not yet paid, are a debt actually due; and, as such, the payment may be
insisted on. But, in order to obviate all difﬁculty, it is proper that the
contracting parties should clearly and minutely explain their intentions
respecting matters of this nature: and they are generally careful to do so.
The fruits and proﬁts of those things which are restored by a treaty
of peace are due from the instant appointed for carrying it into execu-
tion: and if no particular period has been assigned, they are due from
the moment when the restitution of the things themselves was agreed
to: but those which were already received or become payable before the
conclusion of the peace, are not comprised in the restitution; for the
fruits and proﬁts belong to the owner of the soil; and, in the case in
question, possession is accounted a lawful title. For the same reason, in
making a cession of the soil, we do not include in that cession the rents
and proﬁts antecedently due. This Augustus justly maintained against
Sextus Pompey,7 who, on receiving a grant of the Peloponnesus,claimed
the imposts of the preceding years.*
Thosethings, of whichtherestitutionis,withoutfurtherexplanation,
simply stipulated in the treaty of peace, are to be restored in the same
state in which they were when taken: for the word “restitution”naturally
* Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. v. quoted by Grotius, lib. ii. cap. 20, §22 [[Law of War
and Peace]].
7. Sextus Pompey, also known as Magnus Pius, the youngest son of Pompey the
Great, led the opposition to the Second Triumvirate of Octavian, Marc Antony, and
Lepidus, before being executed without trial in 35 b.c.
§29. Cessation
of contributions.
§30. Products
of the thing
restored or
ceded.
§31. In what
condition
things are to
be restored.


chapter iii
669
implies that every thing should be replaced in its former condition.
Thus, the restitution of a thing is to be accompanied with that of all the
rights which were annexed to it when taken. But this rule must not be
extended to comprise those changes which may have been the natural
consequences and effects of the war itself, and of its operations. A town
is to be restored in the condition it was in when taken, as far as it still
remains in that condition, attheconclusionof thepeace.Butif thetown
has been rased or dismantled during the war, that damage was done by
the right of arms, and is buried in oblivion by the act of amnesty. We
are under no obligation to repair the ravages that have been committed
in a country which we restore at the peace: we restore it in its existing
state. But, as it would be a ﬂagrant perﬁdy to ravage that country after
the conclusion of the peace, the case is the same with respect to a town
whose fortiﬁcations have escaped the devastation of war: to dismantle
it previous to the restoration, would be a violation of good-faith and
honour. If the captor has repaired the breaches, and put the place in the
same state it was in before the siege, he is bound to restore it in <443>
that state. If he has added any new works, hemay indeeddemolishthese:
but if he has razed the ancient fortiﬁcations, and constructed others on
a new plan, it will be necessary to come to a particular agreement re-
specting this improvement, or accurately to deﬁne in what conditionthe
place shall be restored. Indeed this last precaution should in every case
be adopted, in order to obviate all dispute and difﬁculty. In drawing up
an instrument solely intended for the restoration of peace, it should be
the object of the parties to leave, if possible, no ambiguity whatever,—
nothing which may have a tendency to rekindle the ﬂames of war. I am
well aware, however, that this is not the practice of those who value
themselves now-a-days on their superior abilities in negotiation: on the
contrary, they study to introduce obscure or ambiguous clauses into a
treaty of peace, in order to furnish their sovereign with a pretext for
broaching a new quarrel, and taking up arms againontheﬁrstfavourable
opportunity. How contrary such pitiful ﬁnesse is to the faith of treaties,
we have already observed (Book II. §231): it is a disparagement of that
candour and magnanimity which should beam forth in all the actions
of a great prince.


670
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
But, as it is extremely difﬁcult wholly to avoid ambiguity in a treaty,
though worded with the greatest care and the most honourable inten-
tions,—and to obviate every doubt which may arise in the application
of its several clauses to particular cases,—recourse must often be had to
the rules of interpretation. We have already devoted an entire chapter
to the exposition of those important rules:* wherefore, instead of en-
tering at present into tedious repetitions, we shall conﬁne ourselves to a
few rules more particularly adapted to the special case before us,—the
interpretation of treaties of peace. 1. In case of doubt, the interpretation
goes against him who prescribed the terms of the treaty: for as it was in
some measure dictated by him, it was his own fault if he neglected to
express himself more clearly: and by extending or restricting the sig-
niﬁcation of the expressions to that meaning which is least favourable
to him, we either do him no injury, or we only do him that to which
he has wilfully exposed himself; whereas, by adopting a contrary mode
of interpretation, we would incur the risk of converting vague or am-
biguous terms into so many snares to entrap the weaker party in the
contract, who has been obliged to subscribe to what the stronger had
dictated.
2. The names of countries ceded by treaty are to be understood ac-
cording to the usage prevailing at the time among skilful and intelligent
men: for it is not to be presumed that weak or ignorant persons should
be intrusted with so important a concern as that of concluding a treaty
of peace; and the articles of a contract are to be understood of what the
contracting parties mostprobably had incontemplation,sincetheobject
in contemplation is the motive and ground of every contract. <444>
3. The treaty of peace naturally and of itself relates only to the war
which it terminates. It is, therefore, in such relation only, that its vague
clauses are to be understood. Thus the simple stipulation of restoring
things to their former condition does not relate to changes which have
not been occasioned by the war itself: consequently this general clause
cannot oblige either of the parties to set at liberty a free people who have
voluntarily given themselves up to him during the war. And as a people,
* Book II. Chap. XVII.
§32. The
interpretation
of a treaty of
peace is to be
against the
superior party.
§33. Names
of ceded
countries.
§34. Restora-
tion not to be
understood of
those who
have volun-
tarily given
themselves up.


chapter iv
671
when abandoned by their sovereign, become free, and may provide for
their own safety in whatever manner they think most advisable (Book
I. §202)—if such people, during the course of the war, have voluntarily,
and without military compulsion, submitted and given themselves up
to the enemy of their former sovereign, the general promise of restoring
conquests shall not extend to them. It were an unavailing plea, to allege
that the party who requires all things to be replaced on their formerfoot-
ing, may have an interest in the independence of the former of those
people, and that he evidently has a very great one in the restoration of
the latter. If he wished to obtain things which the general clause does
not of itself comprise, he should have clearly and speciﬁcally expressed
his intentions relative to them. Stipulations of every kind may be in-
serted in a treaty of peace: but if they bear no relation to the war which
it is the view of the contracting parties to bring to a conclusion, they
must be very expressly speciﬁed; for the treaty is naturally understood
to relate only to its own particular object.
chapter iv
Of the Observance and Breach of the
Treaty of Peace.
The treaty of peace concluded by a lawful power is undoubtedlyapublic
treaty, and obligatory on the whole nation (Book II. §154). It is likewise,
by its nature, a real treaty; for if its duration had been limited to the life
of the sovereign, it would be only a truce, and not a treaty of peace.
Besides, every treaty which, like this, is made with a view to the public
good, is a real treaty (Book II. §198). It is therefore as strongly binding
on the successors as on the prince himself who signed it, since it binds
the state itself, and the successors can never have, in this respect, any
other rights than those of the state.
After all we have said on the faith of treaties and the indispensable
obligation which they impose, it would be superﬂuous to use many
words in shewing how religiously treaties of peace in particular should
be observed both by sovereigns and people. These treaties concern and
§35. The
treaty of
peace binds
the nation and
successors.
§36. It is to
be faithfully
observed.

672
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
bind whole nations; they are of the highest importance; the breach of
them infallibly rekindles the <445> ﬂames of war;—all which consid-
erations give additional force to the obligation of keeping our faith, and
punctually fulﬁlling our promises.
We cannot claim a dispensation from the observance of a treaty of
peace, by alleging that it was extorted from us by fear, or wrested from
us by force. In the ﬁrst place, were this plea admitted, it would destroy,
from the very foundations, all the security of treaties of peace; for there
are few treaties of that kind, which might not be made to afford such a
pretext, as a cloak for the faithless violation of them. To authorise such
an evasion, would be a direct attack on the common safety and welfare
of nations:—the maxim would be detestable, forthesamereasonswhich
have universally established the sacredness of treaties (Book II. §220).
Besides it would generally be disgraceful and ridiculous to advance such
a plea. At the present day, it seldom happens thateitherof thebelligerent
parties perseveres to the last extremity before he will consent to a peace.
Though a nationmay havelostseveralbattles,shecanstilldefendherself:
as long as she has men and arms remaining, she is not destitute of all
resource. If she thinks ﬁt, by a disadvantageous treaty, to procure a nec-
essary peace,—if by great sacriﬁces she delivers herself from imminent
danger or total ruin,—the residue which remains in her possessionisstill
an advantage for which she is indebted to the peace: it was her own free
choice to prefer a certain and immediate loss, but of limited extent, to
an evil of a more dreadful nature, which, though yet at some distance,
she had but too great reason to apprehend.
If ever the plea of constraint may be alleged, it is against an act which
does not deserve the name of a treaty of peace,—against a forced sub-
mission to conditions which are equally offensive to justice and to all the
duties of humanity. If an unjust and rapacious conqueror subdues a
nation, and forces her to acceptof hard,ignominious,andinsupportable
conditions, necessity obliges her to submit: butthisapparenttranquillity
is not a peace; it is an oppression which she endures only so long as she
wants the means of shaking it off, and against which men of spirit rise
on the ﬁrst favourable opportunity. When Ferdinand Cortes8 attacked
8. Hernando Corte´s, 1485–1547, conqueror of the Aztec empire from 1519.
§37. The plea
of fear or force
does not dis-
pense with the
observance.
chapter iv
673
the empire of Mexico without any shadow of reason, without even a
plausible pretext,—if the unfortunate Montezuma9 could have recov-
ered his liberty by submitting to the iniquitous and cruel conditions of
receiving Spanish garrisons into his towns and his capital, of paying an
immense tribute, and obeying the commands of the king of Spain,—
will any man pretend to assert that he would not have been justiﬁable
in seizing a convenient opportunity to recover his rights, to emancipate
his people, and to expel or exterminate the Spanish horde of greedy,
insolent, and cruel usurpers? No! such a monstrous absurdity can never
be seriously maintained. Although the law of nature aims at protecting
the safety and peace of nations by enjoining the faithful observance of
promises, it does not <446> favour oppressors. All its maxims tend to
promote the advantage of mankind: that is the great end of all laws and
rights. Shall he, who with his own hand tears asunder all the bonds of
human society, be afterwards allowed to claim the beneﬁt of them?
Even though it were to happen that this maxim should be abused, and
that a nation should, on the strength of it, unjustly rise in arms and
recommence hostilities,—still it is better to risk that inconvenience
than to furnish usurpers with an easy mode of perpetuating their in-
justice, and establishing their usurpation on a permanent basis. Be-
sides, were you to preach up the contrary doctrine which is so repug-
nant to all the feelings and suggestions of nature, where could you
expect to make proselytes?
Equitable agreements, therefore, or at least such as are supportable,
are alone entitled to the appellation of treaties of peace: these are the
treaties which bind the public faith, and which are punctually to be ob-
served, though in some respects harsh and burthensome. Since the na-
tion consented to them, she must have considered them as in some mea-
sure advantageous under the then existing circumstances; and she is
bound to respect her promise. Were men allowed to rescind at a sub-
sequent period those agreements to which they were glad to subscribe
on a former occasion, there would be an end to all stability in human
affairs.
9. Montezuma, 1466–1520, Aztec emperor defeated by Corte´s in the battle of Te-
nochtitla´n in 1520.
§38. How
many ways
a treaty of
peace may
be broken.


674
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
The breach of a treaty of peace consists in violating the engagements
annexed to it, either by doing what it prohibits, or by not doing what it
prescribes. Now the engagements contracted by treaty may be violated
in three different ways,—either by a conduct that is repugnant to the
nature and essence of every treaty of peace in general,—by proceedings
which are incompatible with the particular nature of the treaty in ques-
tion,—or, ﬁnally, by the violationof any articleexpresslycontainedin it.
First, a nation acts in a manner that is repugnant to the nature and
essence of every treaty of peace, and to peace itself, when she disturbs
it without cause, either by taking up arms and recommencing hostilities
without so much as a plausible pretext, or by deliberately and wantonly
offending the party with whom she has concluded a peace, and offering
such treatment to him or his subjects, as is incompatible with the state
of peace, and such as he cannot submit to, without being deﬁcient in
the duty which he owes to himself. It is likewise acting contrary to the
nature of all treaties of peace to take up arms a second time for the same
subject that had given rise to the war which has been brought to a con-
clusion, or through resentment of any transaction that had taken place
during the continuance of hostilities. If she cannot allege at least some
plausible pretext borrowed from a fresh cause, which may serve to pal-
liate her conduct, she evidently revives the old war that was extinct, and
breaks the treaty of peace.
But to take up arms for a fresh cause is no breach of the treaty of
peace: for, though a nation has promised to live in peace, she has not
therefore promised to submit to injuries and wrongs <447> of every
kind, rather than procure justice by force of arms. The rupture proceeds
from him who, by his obstinate injustice, renders this method necessary.
But here it is proper to recall to mind what we have more than once
observed,—namely, that nations acknowledge no common judge on
earth,—that they cannot mutually condemn each other without ap-
peal,—and, ﬁnally, that they are bound to act in their quarrels as if each
was equally in the right. On this footing, whether the new cause which
gives birth to hostilities be just or not, neither he who makes it a handle
for taking up arms, nor he who refuses satisfaction, is reputed to break
the treaty of peace, provided the cause of complaint on the one hand,
§39. By a
conduct con-
trary to the
nature of every
treaty of
peace.
§40. To take
up arms for a
fresh cause is
no breach of
the treaty of
peace.


chapter iv
675
and the refusal of satisfaction on the other, have at least some colour of
reason, so as to render the question doubtful. When nations cannot
come to any agreement on questions of this kind, their only remaining
resource is an appeal to the sword. In such case the war is absolutely a
new one, and does not involve any infraction of the existing treaty.
And as a nation, in making a peace, does not thereby give up her right
of contracting alliances and assisting her friends, it is likewise no breach
of the treaty of peace, to form a subsequent alliance with the enemies of
the party with whom she has concluded such treaty,—to join them, to
espouse their quarrel, and unite her arms with theirs,—unless the treaty
expressly prohibits such connections. At most she can only be said to
embark in a fresh war in defence of another people’s cause.
But I here suppose these new allies to have some plausible grounds
for taking up arms, and that the nation in question has just and sub-
stantial reasons for supporting them in the contest. Otherwise, to unite
with them just as they are entering on the war or when they have already
commenced hostilities, would be evidently seeking a pretext to eludethe
treaty of peace, and no better, in fact, than an artful and perﬁdious vi-
olation of it.
It is of great importance to draw a proper distinction between a new
war and the breach of an existing treaty of peace, because the rights
acquired by such treaty still subsist notwithstanding the new war;
whereas they are annulled by the rupture of the treaty on which they
were founded. It is true, indeed, that the party who had granted those
rights, does not fail to obstruct the exercise of them during the course
of the war, as far as lies in his power,—and even may, by the right of
arms, wholly deprive his enemy of them, as well as he may wrest from
him his other possessions. But in that case he with-holds those rights as
things taken from the enemy, who, on a new treaty of peace, may urge
the restitution of them. In negotiations of that kind, there is a material
difference between demanding the restitutionof whatwewerepossessed
of before the war, and requiring new concessions: a little equality in our
successes entitles us to insist on the former, whereas nothing less than a
decided superiority can give us a claim to the latter. It often happens,
when nearly equal success <448> has attended the arms of both parties,
§41. A subse-
quent alliance
with an enemy
is likewise no
breach of the
treaty.
§42. Why a
distinction is
to be made
between a new
war and a
breach of the
treaty.


676
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
that the belligerent powers agree mutually to restoretheirconquests,and
to replace every thing in its former state. When this is the case, if the
war in which they were engaged was a new one, the former treaties still
subsist: but if those treaties were broken by taking up arms a second
time for the same subject, and an old war was revived, they remain void;
so that, if the parties wish they should again take effect, they must ex-
pressly specify and conﬁrm them in their new treaty.
The question before us is highly important in another view also,—
that is, in its relation to other nations who may be interestedinthetreaty,
inasmuch as their own affairs require them to maintain and enforce the
observance of it. It is of the utmost consequence to the guarantees of
the treaty, if there are any,—and also to the allies, who have to discover
and ascertain the cases in which they are bound to furnish assistance.
Finally, he who breaks a solemn treaty is much more odious than the
other who, after making an ill-grounded demand, supports it by arms.
The former adds perﬁdy to injustice: he strikes at the foundation of
public tranquillity; and as he thereby injures all nations, he affords them
just grounds for entering into a confederacy in order to curb and repress
him. Wherefore, asweoughttobecautiousof imputingthemoreodious
charge, Grotius justly observes, that, in a case of doubt, and where the
recurrence to arms may be vindicated by some specious pretext resting
on a new ground, “it is better that we should, in the conduct of him
who takes up arms anew, presume simple injustice, unaccompanied by
perﬁdy, than account him at once guilty both of perﬁdy and injustice.”*
Justiﬁable self-defence is no breach of the treaty of peace. It is a nat-
ural right which we cannot renounce: and in promising to live in peace,
we only promise not to attack without cause, andtoabstainfrominjuries
and violence. But there are two modes of defending our persons or our
property: sometimes the violence offered to us will admit of no other
remedy than the exertion of open force; and under such circumstances
we may lawfully have recourse to it. On other occasions we may obtain
redress for the damage and injury by gentler methods; and to these we
ought of course to give the preference. Such is the rule of conductwhich
* Lib. iii. cap. 20, §28 [[Law of War and Peace]].
§43. Justiﬁable
self-defence is
no breach of
the treaty.


chapter iv
677
ought to be observed by two nations that are desirous of maintaining
peace, whenever the subjects of either have happened to break out into
any act of violence. Present force is checked and repelled by force. But
if there is question of obtainingreparationof thedamagedone,together
with adequate satisfactionfortheoffence,wemustapplytothesovereign
of the delinquents; we must not pursue them into his dominions, or
have recourse to arms, unless he has refused to do us justice. If we have
reason to fear that the offenders will escape,—as, for instance, if a band
of unknown per-<449>sons from a neighbouring country have made
an irruption into our territory,—we are authorised to pursue them with
an armed force into their own country, until they be seized: and their
sovereign cannot consider our conduct in any other light than that of
just and lawful self-defence, provided we commit no hostilities against
innocent persons.
When the principal contracting party has included his allies in the
treaty, their cause becomes, in this respect, inseparablefromhis;andthey
are entitled, equally with him, to enjoy all the conditions essential to a
treaty of peace; so that any act, which, if committed against himself,
would be a breach of the treaty, is no less a breach of it, if committed
against the allies whom he has caused to be included in his treaty. If the
injury be done to a new ally, or to one who is not included in the treaty,
it may indeed furnish a new ground for war, but is no infringement of
the treaty of peace.
The second way of breaking a treaty of peace is by doing any thing
contrary to what the particular nature of the treaty requires. Thus every
procedure that is inconsistent with the rules of friendship, is a violation
of a treaty of peace which has been concluded under the express con-
dition of thenceforward living in amity and good understanding. To
favour a nation’s enemies,—to give harsh treatment to her subjects,—
to lay unnecessary restrictions on her commerce, or give another nation
a preference over her without reason,—to refuse assisting her with pro-
visions, which she is willing to pay for, and we ourselvescanwellspare,—
to protect her factious or rebellious subjects,—to afford them an asy-
lum,—all such proceedings are evidently inconsistent with the laws of
friendship. To this list, may, accordingtocircumstances,bealsoadded—
§44. Causes
of rupture on
account of
allies.
§45.
2. The treaty
is broken by
what is
contrary to
its particular
nature.

678
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
the building of fortresses on the frontiers of a state,—expressingdistrust
against her,—levying troops, and refusing to acquaint her with the mo-
tives for such step, &c. But, in affording a retreat to exiles,—in har-
bouring subjects who chuse to quit their country, without any intention
of injuring it by their departure, and solely for the advantage of their
private affairs,—in charitably receiving emigrants who departfromtheir
country with a view to enjoy liberty of conscience elsewhere,—there is
nothing inconsistent with the character of a friend. The private laws of
friendship do not, according to the caprice of our friends, dispense with
our observance of the common duties of humanity which we owe to
the rest of our species.
Lastly, the peace is broken by the violation of any of the express ar-
ticles of the treaty. This third way of breaking it is the most decisive, the
least susceptible of quibble or evasion. Whoever fails in hisengagements
annuls the contract, as far as depends on him:—this cannot admit of a
doubt.
But it is asked, whether the violation of a single article of the treaty
can operate a total rupture of it? Some writers,* here <450> drawing a
distinction between the articles that are connected together (connexi),
and those that stand detached and separate (diversi), maintain, that, al-
though the treaty be violated in the detached articles, the peace never-
theless still subsists with respect to the others. But, to me, the opinion
of Grotius appears evidently founded on the nature and spirit of treaties
of peace. That great man says that all the articles of one and the same
treaty are conditionally included in each other, as if each of the con-
tracting parties had formally said, “I will do such or such thing,provided
that, on your part, you do so and so”:† and he justly adds, that, when it
is designed that the engagement shall not be thereby rendered ineffec-
tual, this expressclauseisinserted,—that,“thoughanyoneof thearticles
of the treaty may happen to be violated, the others shall nevertheless
subsist in full force.” Such an agreement may unquestionably be made.
It may likewise be agreed that the violationof onearticleshallonlyannul
* See Wolf, Jus Gent. §§1022, 1023.
† Lib. iii. cap. xix. §14 [[Law of War and Peace]].
§46.
3. By the
violation of
any article.
§47. The
violation of a
single article
breaks the
whole treaty.
chapter iv
679
those correspondingtoit, and which,asitwere,constitutetheequivalent
to it. But if this clause be not expressly inserted in the treaty of peace,
the violation of a single article overthrows the whole treaty, as we have
proved above, in speaking of treaties in general (Book II. §202).
It is equally nugatory to attempt making a distinction in this instance
between the articles of greater and thoseof lesserimportance.According
to strict justice, the violation of the most triﬂing article dispenses the
injured party from the observance of the others, since they are all, as we
have seen above, connected with each other, as so many conditions. Be-
sides, what a source of disputes will such a distinction lay open!—Who
shall determine the importance of the article violated?—We may, how-
ever, assert with truth, that, to be ever ready to annul a treaty on the
slightest cause of complaint, is by no means consonant to the reciprocal
duties of nations, to that mutual charity, that love of peace, which
should always inﬂuence their conduct.
In order to prevent so serious an inconvenience, it is prudent to agree
on a penalty to be suffered by the party who violates any of the less
important articles: and then, on his submitting to the penalty, the treaty
still subsists in full force. In like manner, there may, to the violation of
each individual article, be annexed a penalty proportionate to its im-
portance. We have treated of this subject in our remarks on truces
(Book III. §243), to which we refer the reader.
Studied delays are equivalent to an express denial, and differ from it
only by the artiﬁce with which he who practises them seeks to palliate
his want of faith: he adds fraud to perﬁdy, and actuallyviolatesthearticle
which he should fulﬁl.
But if a real impediment stand in the way, time must be allowed; for
no one is bound to perform impossibilities. And for the same reason, if
any unsurmountable obstacle should render the <451> execution of an
article not only impracticable for the present, but forever impossible,no
blame is imputable to him who had engaged for the performance of it;
nor can his inability furnish the other party with a handle for annulling
the treaty: but the latter should accept of an indemniﬁcation, if the case
will admit of it, and the indemniﬁcation be practicable. However, if the
thing which was to have been performed in pursuance of the article in
§48. Whether
a distinction
may here be
made between
the more and
the less impor-
tant articles.
§49. Penalty
annexed to the
violation of an
article.
§50. Studied
delays.
§51. Unsur-
mountable
impediments.


680
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
question be of such a nature, that the treaty evidently appears to have
been concluded with a sole view to that particular thing, and not to any
equivalent,—the intervening impossibility undoubtedly cancels the
treaty. Thus, a treaty of protection becomes void when the protector is
unable to afford the promised protection, althoughhis inabilitydoesnot
arise from any faulton hispart. In thesamemanneralso,whateverprom-
ises a sovereign may have made on condition that the other party should
procure him the restoration of an important town, he is released from
the performance of every thing which he had promised as the purchase
of the recovery, if he cannot be put in possession. Such is the invariable
rule of justice. But rigid justice is not always to be insisted on:—peace
is soessentialtothewelfareof mankind,andnationsaresostrictlybound
to cultivate it, to procure it, and to re-establish it when interrupted,—
that, whenever any such obstacles impede the execution of a treaty of
peace, we ought ingenuously to accede to every reasonable expedient,
and accept of equivalents or indemniﬁcations,ratherthancancelatreaty
of peace already concluded, and again have recourse to arms.
We have already in an express chapter (Book II. Chap. VI.)examined
how and on what occasions the actions of subjects may be imputed to
the sovereign and the nation. It is by that circumstance we must be
guided in determining how far the proceedings of the subjects may be
capable of annulling a treaty of peace. They cannot produce such effect
unless so far as they are imputable to the sovereign. He who is injured
by the subjects of another nation, takes satisfaction for the offence,him-
self, when he meets with the delinquents in his own territories, or in a
free place, as, for instance, on the open sea; or, if more agreeable to him,
he demands justice of their sovereign. If the offendersarerefractorysub-
jects, no demand can be made on their sovereign; but whoever can seize
them, even in a free place, executes summary justice on them himself.
Such is the mode observed towards pirates: and, in order to obviate all
misunderstandings, it is generally agreed that the same treatment be
given to all private individuals who commit acts of hostility without
being able to produce a commission from their sovereign.
The actions of our allies are still less imputable to us than those of
our subjects. The infractions of a treaty of peace by allies, even by those
§52. Infrac-
tions of the
treaty of
peace by the
subjects;
§53. or
by allies.

chapter iv
681
who have been included in it, or who joined in it as principals, canthere-
fore produce no rupture of it except with regard to themselves, and do
not affect it in what concerns their <452> ally, who, on his part, reli-
giously observes his engagements. With respect to him, the treaty sub-
sists in full force, provided he do not undertake to support the cause of
those perﬁdious allies. If he furnishes them with such assistance as he
cannot be bound to give them on an occasion of this nature, he espouses
their quarrel, and becomes an accomplice in their breach of faith. But
if he has an interest in preventing their ruin, he may interpose, and, by
obliging them to make every suitable reparation, save them from an op-
pression of which he would himself collaterally feel the effects. It even
becomes an act of justice to undertake their defence against an impla-
cable enemy who will not be contented with an adequate satisfaction.
When the treaty of peace is violated by one of the contractingparties,
the other has the option of either declaring the treaty null and void, or
allowing it still to subsist: for a contract which contains reciprocal en-
gagements, cannot be binding on him with respect to the party who on
his side pays no regard to the same contract. But if he chuses nottocome
to a rupture, the treaty remains valid and obligatory. It would be absurd
that he who had been guilty of the violation should pretend that the
agreement was annulled by his own breach of faith: this would indeed
be an easy way of shaking off engagements, and would reducealltreaties
to empty formalities. If the injured party be willing to let the treaty sub-
sist, he may either pardon the infringement,—insist on an indemniﬁ-
cation or adequate satisfaction,—or discharge himself, on his part, from
those engagements corresponding with the violated article,—those
promises he had made in consideration of a thing which has not been
performed. But if he determines on demanding a just indemniﬁcation,
and the party in fault refuses it, then the treaty is necessarily broken,and
the injured party has a very just cause for taking up arms again. And
indeed this is generally the case; for it seldom happens that the infractor
will submit to make reparation, and thereby acknowledge himself in
fault.
§54. Right of
the offended
party against
him who has
violated the
treaty.


682
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
chapter v
Of the Right of Embassy, or the Right of sending
and receiving public Ministers.
It is necessary that nations should treat and hold intercourse together,
in order to promote their interests,—to avoid injuring each other,—and
to adjust and terminate their disputes. And as they all lie under the in-
dispensable obligation of giving their consent and concurrence to what-
ever conduces to the general advantage and welfare (Prelim. §13)—of
procuring the means of accommodating and terminating their differ-
ences <453> (Book II. §323, &c.)—and as each has a right to every thing
which her preservation requires (Book I. §§18)—to every thing which
can promote her perfection without injuring others (ibid. §23), as also
to the necessary means of fulﬁlling her duties,—it results from the
premisses, that each nation is at once possessed of the right to treat and
communicate with others, and bound by reciprocal obligation to con-
sent to such communication as far as the situation of her affairs will
permit her.
But nations or sovereign states do not treat togetherimmediately;and
their rulers or sovereigns cannot well come to a personal conference in
order to treat of their affairs. Such interviews would often be imprac-
ticable: and, exclusive of delays, trouble, expense, and so many other
inconveniences, it is rarely, according to the observation of Philip de
Commines,10 that any good effect could be expected from them. The
only expedient, therefore, which remains for nations and sovereigns, is
to communicate and treat with each other by the agency of procurators
or mandatories,—of delegateschargedwiththeircommands,andvested
with their powers,—that is to say, public ministers. This term, in itsmore
extensive and general sense, denotes any person intrusted with the man-
agement of public affairs, but is more particularly understood to des-
ignate one who acts in such capacity at a foreign court.
At present there are several orders of public ministers, and in the se-
10. Philippe de Commines, French diplomat and chronicler, ca. 1447–1511.
§55. It is
necessary that
nations be
enabled to
treat and
communicate
together.
§56. They
do this by
the agency
of public
ministers.


chapter v
683
quel we shall speak of them; but whatever difference custom has intro-
duced between them, the essential character is common to them all; I
mean that of minister, and, in some sort, representative of a foreign
power,—a person charged with the commands of that power, and del-
egated to manage his affairs: and that quality is sufﬁcient for our present
purpose.
Every sovereign state then has a right to send and to receive public
ministers; for they are necessary instruments in the management of
those affairs which sovereigns have to transact with each other, and the
channels of that correspondence which they have a right to carry on.
In the ﬁrst chapter of this work may be seen who are those sovereigns,
and what those independent states, that are entitled to rank in the great
society of nations. They are the powers to whom belongs the right of
embassy.
An unequal alliance, or even a treaty of protection, not being incom-
patible with sovereignty (Book I. §§5, 6)—such treaties do not of them-
selves deprive a state of the right of sending and receiving public min-
isters. If the inferior ally or the party protected has not expressly
renounced the right of entertaining connections and treating withother
powers, he necessarily retains that of sending ministers to them, and of
receiving their ministers in turn. The same rule applies to such vassals
and tributaries as are not subjects (Book I. §§7, 8).
Nay more, this right may even belong to princes or communities not
possessed of sovereign power: for, the rights whose assemblage consti-
tutes the plenitude of sovereignty, are not indivi-<454>sible: and if, by
the constitution of the state, by the concession of the sovereign, or by
reservations which the subjects have made with him, a prince or com-
munity remains possessed of any one of those rights which usually be-
long to the sovereign alone, such prince or community may exercise it,
and avail themselves of it in all its effects and all its natural or necessary
consequences, unless they have been formally excepted. Though the
princes and states of the empire are dependent on the emperor and the
empire, yet they are sovereign in many respects: and as the constitutions
of the empire secure to them the right of treating with foreign powers
and contracting alliances with them, they incontestably have also that
§57. Every
sovereign state
has a right
to send and
receive public
ministers.
§58. An
unequal alli-
ance, or a
treaty of
protection,
does not take
away this
right.
§59. Right of
the princes
and states of
the empire in
this respect.

684
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
of sending and receiving public ministers. The emperors, indeed, when
they felt themselves able to carry their pretensions very high, have some-
times disputed that right, or at least attempted to render the exercise of
it subject to the controul of their supreme authority,—insisting that
their permission was necessary to give it a sanction. But since the peace
of Westphalia,11 and by means of the imperial capitulations, the
princes and states of Germany have been able to maintain themselves
in the possession of that right; and they have secured to themselves so
many other rights, that the empire is now considered as a republic of
sovereigns.
There are even cities which are and which acknowledge themselves
to be in a state of subjection, that have nevertheless a right to receive the
ministers of foreign powers, and to send them deputies, since they have
a right to treat with them. This latter circumstance is the main point
upon which the whole question turns: for whosoever has a right to the
end, has a right to the means. It would be absurd to acknowledge the
right of negotiating and treating, and to contest the necessary means of
doing it. Those cities of Switzerland, such as Neufchatel and Bienne,
which have the right of banner, have, by natural consequence, a right
to treat with foreign powers, although the cities in question be subject
to the dominion of a prince: for the right of banner, or of arms, com-
prehends that of granting succours of troops,* provided such grants be
not inconsistent with the service of the prince. Now, if those cities are
entitled to grant troops, they must necessarily be at liberty to listen to
the applications made to them on the subject by a foreign power, and
to treat respecting the conditions. Hence it follows that they may also
depute an agent to him for that purpose, or receive his ministers. And
as they are at the same time vested with the administration of their own
internal police, they have it in their power to insure respect to such for-
eign ministers as come to them. What is here said of the rights of those
cities is conﬁrmed by ancient and constant practice. However exalted
and extraordinary such rights may appear, they will not be thought
* See the History of the Helvetic Confederacy, by M. de Watteville.
11. 1648.
§60. Cities
that have
the right
of banner.


chapter v
685
strange, if it be considered that those very cities were already possessed
of extensive privileges at <455> the time when their princes were them-
selves dependent on the emperors, or on other liege lords who were im-
mediate vassals of the empire. When the princes shook off the yoke of
vassalage, and established themselves in a state of perfect independence,
the considerable cities in their territories made their own conditions;
and, instead of rendering their situation worse, it was very natural that
they should take advantage of the existing circumstances, in order to
secure to themselves a greater portion of freedom and happiness. Their
sovereigns cannot now advance any plea in objection to the terms on
which those cities consented to follow their fortunes, and to acknowl-
edge them as their only superiors.
Viceroys and chief governors of a sovereignty or remote province
have frequently the right of sending and receiving public ministers;but,
in that particular, they act in the name and by the authority of the sov-
ereign whom they represent, and whose rights they exercise. That en-
tirely depends on the will of the master by whom they are delegated.
The viceroys of Naples, the governors of Milan, and the governors-
general of the Netherlands for Spain, were invested with such power.
The right of embassy, likeall theotherrightsof sovereignty,originally
resides in the nation as its principal and primitive subject. During an
interregnum, the exercise of that right reverts to the nation, or devolves
on those whom the laws have invested with the regency of the state.They
may send ministers in the same manner as the sovereign used to do; and
these ministers possess the same rights as were enjoyed by those of the
sovereign. The republic of Poland sends embassadors while her throne is
vacant; nor would she suffer that they should be treated with less respect
and consideration than those who are sent while she has a king.Cromwell
effectually maintained the embassadors of England in the same rank and
respectability which they possessed under the regal authority.
Such being the rights of nations, a sovereign who attempts to hinder
another from sending and receivingpublicministers,doeshimaninjury,
and offends against the law of nations. It is attacking a nation in one of
her most valuable rights, and disputing her title to that which nature
herself gives to every independent society: it is offering an insult to na-
tions in general, and tearing asunder the ties by which they are united.
§61. Ministers
of viceroys.
§62. Ministers
of the nation
or of the
regents
during an
interregnum.
§63. Of him
who molests
another in the
exercise of
the right of
embassy.


686
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
But this is to be understood only of a time of peace: war introduces
other rights. It allows us to cut off from an enemy all his resources, and
to hinder him from sending ministers to solicit assistance.Thereareeven
occasions when we may refuse a passage to the ministers of neutral na-
tions, who are going to our enemy. We are under no obligation to allow
them an opportunity of perhaps conveying him intelligence of a mo-
mentous nature, and concerting with him the means of giving him as-
sistance, &c. This admits of no doubt, for instance, in the case of a
besieged town. No right can authorise the minister of a neutral power,
or any other person whatsoever, to enter the place without the <456>
besieger’s consent. But, in order to avoid giving offence to sovereigns,
good reasons must be alleged for refusing to let their ministers pass: and
with such reasons they must rest satisﬁed, if they are disposed to remain
neuter. Sometimes even a passage is refused to suspected ministers in
critical and dubious junctures, although there do not exist any openwar.
But this is a delicate proceeding, which, if not justiﬁed by reasons that
are perfectly satisfactory, produces an acrimony that easily degenerates
into an open rupture.
As nations are obliged to correspond together, to attend to the pro-
posals and demands made to them, to keep open a free and safe channel
of communication for the purpose of mutually understanding each
other’s views and bringing their disputes to an accommodation,—asov-
ereign cannot, without very particular reasons, refuse admitting and
hearing the minister of a friendly power, or of one with whom he is at
peace. But in case there be reasons for not admitting him into the heart
of the country, he may notify to him that he will send proper persons
to meet him at an appointed place on the frontier, there to hear his pro-
posals. It then becomes the foreign minister’s duty to stop at the place
assigned: it is sufﬁcient that he obtains a hearing; that being the utmost
that he has a right to expect.
The obligation, however, does not extend so far as to include that of
suffering at all times the residence of perpetual ministers, who are de-
sirous of remaining at the sovereign’s court, although they have no busi-
nesstotransactwithhim.Itisnatural,indeed,andperfectlyconformable
to the sentiments which nations ought mutually to entertain for each
§64. What is
allowable in
this respect in
time of war.
§65. The
minister of a
friendly power
is to be
received.
§66. Of resi-
dent ministers.



chapter v
687
other, that a friendly reception should be given to those resident min-
isters, when there is no inconvenience to be apprehended fromtheirstay.
But if there exist any substantial reason to the contrary, the advantage
of the state undoubtedly claims a preference; and the foreign sovereign
cannot take it amiss if his minister be requested to withdraw, when he
has fulﬁlled the object of his commission, or when he has not any busi-
ness to transact. The custom of keeping every-where ministers con-
stantly resident is now so ﬁrmly established, that whoever should refuse
to conform to it, must allege very good reasons for his conduct, if he
wishes to avoid giving offence. These reasons may arise from particular
conjunctures; but there are also ordinary reasons ever subsisting, and
such as relate to the constitution of a government and the state of a
nation. Republics would often have very good reasons of the latterkind,
to excuse themselves from continually suffering the residence of foreign
ministers, who corrupt the citizens,—gain them over to their masters,
to the great detriment of the republic,—and excite and foment parties
in the state, &c. And even though no other evil should arise from their
presence than that of inspiring a nation, originally plain, frugal, and
virtuous, with a taste for luxury, the thirst of gain, and the manners of
courts,—that alone would be more than sufﬁcient to justify the conduct
of wise and provident rulers in dis-<457>missing them. The Polishgov-
ernment is not fond of resident ministers; and indeed their intrigues
with the members of the diet have furnished but too many reasons for
keeping them at a distance. In the war of 1666, a nuncio publicly com-
plained in the open diet, of the French embassador’s unnecessarily pro-
longing his stay in Poland, and declared that he ought to be considered
as a spy. In 1668, other members of that body moved for a law toregulate
the length of time that an embassador should be allowed to remain in
the kingdom.*
The greater the calamities of war are, the more it is incumbent on
nations to preserve means for putting an end to it. Hence it becomes
necessary, that, even in the midst of hostilities, they be at liberty to send
ministers to each other, for the purpose of making overtures of peace,
* Wicquefort’s Embassador, book i. §1.
§67. How the
ministers of an
enemy are to
be admitted.


688
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
or proposals tending to moderate the transports of hostile rage. Itistrue,
indeed, that the minister of an enemy cannot come withoutpermission;
accordingly a passport or safe-conduct is asked for him, either through
the intervention of some common friend, or by one of thosemessengers
who are protected by the laws of war, and of whom we shall speak in
the sequel,—I mean a trumpeter, or drummer. It is true also, that, for
substantial reasons, the safe-conduct may be refused, and admission de-
nied to the minister. But this liberty, which is authorised by the care that
every nation is bound to bestow on her own safety, is no bar to ourlaying
it down as a general maxim, that we are not to refuse admitting and
hearing an enemy’s minister; that is to say, that war alone, and of itself,
is not a sufﬁcient reason for refusing to hear any proposal coming from
an enemy; but that, to warrant such refusal, there must existsomereason
of a particular nature, and which rests upon very good grounds,—as,
for instance, whenanartfulanddesigningenemyhasbyhisownconduct
given us just cause to apprehend that his only intention, in sending his
ministers and making proposals, is to disunite the members of a con-
federacy, to lull them into security by holding out false appearances of
peace, and then to overpower them by surprise.
Before we conclude this chapter, it will be proper to discuss a cele-
brated question, which has been often debated. It is asked whether for-
eign nations may receive the embassadors and other ministers of a
usurper, and send their ministers to him. In this particular, foreignpow-
ers takefor theirrulethecircumstanceof actualpossession,if theinterest
of their affairs so require: and indeed there cannot be a more certain
rule, or one that is more agreeable to the law of nations and the inde-
pendency of states. As foreigners have no right to interfere in the do-
mestic concerns of a nation, they are not obliged to canvasandscrutinise
her conduct in the management of them, in order to determine how far
it is either just or unjust. They may, if they think proper, suppose the
right to be annexed to the posses-<458>sion. Whenanationhasexpelled
her sovereign, other powers, who do not chuse to declare against herand
to risk the consequences of her enmity or open hostility, consider her
thenceforward as a freeandsovereignstate,withouttakingonthemselves
to determine whether she has acted justly in withdrawing from her al-
§68. Whether
ministers may
be received
from or sent
to a usurper.


chapter v
689
legiance to the prince by whom she was governed. Cardinal Mazarin12
received Lockhart,13 whom Cromwell had sent as embassador from the
republic of England, and refused to see either king Charles the Second,
or his ministers. If a people, after having expelled their prince, submit
to another,—if they change the order of succession, and acknowledge
a sovereign to the prejudice of the natural and appointed heir,—foreign
powers may, in this instance also, consider what has been done as lawful:
it is no quarrel or business of theirs. At the beginning of the last century,
Charles duke of Sudermania, having obtained the crown of Sweden to
the prejudice of his nephew Sigismund king of Poland, was soon ac-
knowledged by most sovereigns. Villeroy, minister of the French mon-
arch Henry the Fourth, in his dispatches of the 8th of April1608,plainly
said to the president Jeannin, “All these reasons and considerationsshall
not prevent the king from treating with Charles, if he ﬁnds it to be his
interest, and that of his kingdom.” This remark was sensible and judi-
cious. The king of France was neither the judge nor the guardian of the
Swedish nation, that he should, contrary to the interest of his ownking-
dom, refuse to acknowledge the king whom Sweden had chosen, under
pretence that a competitor termed Charles a usurper. Had the charge
been even founded in justice, it was an affair which did not fall under
the cognisance of foreigners.
Therefore, when foreign powers have received the ministers of a
usurper, and sent theirs to him, the lawful prince, on recovering the
throne, cannot complain of these measures as an injury, nor justly make
them the ground of a war, provided those powers have not proceeded
to greater lengths, nor furnished any assistance against him. But to ac-
knowledge the dethroned prince or his heir after the state has solemnly
acknowledged the person to whom the sceptre has been transferred, is
an injury done to the latter, and a profession of enmity to the nation
that has chosen him. Such a step, hazarded in favour of James the Sec-
ond’s son, was, by William the Third and the British nation, alleged as
one of the principal reasons of the war which England soon after de-
12. Cardinal Mazarin, a chief minister of France, 1642–61.
13. Sir William Lockhart, 1621–76.

690
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
clared against France. Notwithstanding all the caution and all the pro-
testations of Louis the Fourteenth, his acknowledgement of youngStu-
art as king of England, Scotland, and Ireland, under the title of James
the Third, was considered by the English as an injury done both to the
king and to the nation. <459>
chapter iii
91
that its councils are exposed to the caprice or treachery of a single
member?
We shall conclude this chapter, with observing, that a nation ought
to know itself. Without this knowledge, it cannot make any successful
endeavours after its own perfection. It ought to have a just idea of its
state, to enable it to take the most proper measures; it ought to know
the progress it has already made, and what further advances it has still
to make,—what advantages it possesses, and what defects it labours un-
der, in order to preserve the former, and correct the latter. Without this
knowledge, a nation will act at random, and often take the most im-
proper measures. It will think it acts with great wisdom in imitating the
conduct of nations that are reputed wise and skilful,—not perceiving
that such or such regulation, such or such practice, though salutary to
one state, is often pernicious to another. Every thing ought to be con-
ducted according to its nature. Nations cannot be wellgovernedwithout
such regulations as are suitable to theirrespectivecharacters;andinorder
to this, their characters ought to be known.
chapter iii
Of the Constitution of a State, and the Duties
and Rights of the Nation in this respect.
We were unable to avoid, in the ﬁrst chapter, anticipating something of
the subject of this.
We have seen already that every political society must necessarily es-
tablish a public authority, to regulate their common affairs,—to pre-
scribe to each individual the conduct he ought to observe with a view to
the public welfare,—and to possess the means of procuring obedience.
This authority essentially belongs to the body of the society; but it may
be exercised in a variety of ways; and every society has a right to choose
that mode which suits it best.
The fundamental regulation thatdeterminesthemannerinwhichthe
public authority is to be executed, is what forms the <9> constitution of
the state. In this is seen the form in which the nation acts in quality of
§25. A nation
ought to know
itself.
§26. Of public
authority.
§27. What is
the constitu-
tion of a state.


92
book i: nations in themselves
a body-politic,—how and by whom the people are to be governed,—
and what are the rights and duties of the governors. This constitution
is in fact nothing more than the establishment of the order in which a
nation proposes to labour in common for obtaining those advantages
with a view to which the political society was established.
The perfection of a state, and its aptitude to attain theendsof society,
must then depend on its constitution: consequently the most important
concern of a nation that forms a political society, and its ﬁrst and most
essential duty towards itself, is to chuse the best constitution possible,
and that most suitable to its circumstances. When it makes this choice,
it lays the foundation of its own preservation, safety, perfection, and
happiness:—it cannot take too much care in placing these on a solid
basis.
The laws are regulations established by public authority, to be ob-
served in society. All these ought to relate to the welfare of the state and
of the citizens. The laws made directly with a view to the public welfare
are political laws; and in this class, those that concern the body itself and
the being of the society, the form of government, the manner in which
the public authority is to be exerted,—those, in a word, which together
form the constitution of the state, are the fundamental laws.
The civil laws are those that regulate the rights and conduct of the
citizens among themselves.
Every nation that would not be wanting to itself, ought to apply its
utmost care in establishing these laws, and principally its fundamental
laws,—in establishing them, I say, with wisdom, in a manner suitable to
the genius of the people, and to all the circumstances in which they may
be placed: they ought to determine them and make them known with
plainness and precision, to the end that they may possess stability, that
they may not be eluded, and, that they may create, if possible, no dis-
sension—that, on the one hand, he or they to whom the exercise of the
sovereign power is committed, and the citizens, on the other, may
equally know their duty, and their rights. It is not here necessary to con-
sider in detail, what that constitution and those laws ought to be:—this
discussion belongs to public law and politics. Besides, the laws and con-
stitutions of different states must necessarily vary according to the dis-
§28. The
nation ought
to chuse
the best
constitution.
§29. Of
political,
fundamental,
and civil laws.


chapter vi
Of the several Orders of public Ministers,—
of the representative Character,—and of
the Honours due to Ministers.
In former days, people were scarcely acquainted with more than one
order of public ministers, in Latin termed legati, which appellation has
been rendered by that of “embassadors.” But when courts were become
more proud, and at the same time more punctilious in the article of
ceremony, and especially when they had introduced the idea of extend-
ing the minister’s representation even to that of his master’s dignity, it
was thought expedient to employ commissioners of less exalted rank on
certain occasions, in order to avoid trouble, expense, and disputes.Louis
the Eleventh of France14 was perhaps the ﬁrst who set the example.Thus
several orders of ministers being established, more or less dignity was
annexed to their character, and proportionate honours were requiredfor
them.
Every minister in some measure represents his master, as every agent
or delegate represents his constituent. But this representation relates to
the affairsof hisofﬁce:theministerrepresentsthesubjectinwhomreside
the rights which he is to exercise, preserve, and assert,—the rights re-
specting which he is to treat in his master’s stead. Although such rep-
resentation is admitted in a general view, and sofaras respectstheessence
of affairs, it is with an abstraction of the dignity of the constituent. In
process of time, however, princes would have ministers to represent
14. Louis XI of France, r. 1461–83.
§69. Origin
of the several
orders of pub-
lic ministers.
§70. Represen-
tative character.


chapter vi
691
them, not only in their rights and in the transaction of their affairs, but
also in their dignity, their greatness, and their pre-eminence. It was, no
doubt, to those signal occasions of state, those ceremonies for which
embassadors are sent, as, for instance, marriages, that this custom owes
its origin. But so exalted a degree of dignity in the minister is attended
with considerable inconvenience in conducting business, and, besides
occasioning trouble and embarrassment, is often productive of difﬁ-
cultiesanddisputes.Thiscircumstancehasgivenbirthtodifferentorders
of public ministers, and various degrees of representation. Custom has
established three principal degrees. What is, by way of pre-eminence,
called the representative character, is the faculty possessedbytheminister,
of representing his master even in his very person and dignity.
The representative character, so termed by way of pre-eminence, or
in contradistinction to other kinds of representation, constitutes the
minister of the ﬁrst rank, the embassador. It places him above all other
ministers who are not invested with the same character, and precludes
their entering into competition with the embassador. At present there
are embassadors <460> ordinary and extraordinary: but this is no more
than an accidental distinction, merely relative to the subjectof theirmis-
sion. Yet almost every-where some difference is made in the treatment of
these different embassadors. That, however, is purely matter of custom.
Envoys are not invested with the representative character, properly so
called, or in the ﬁrst degree. They are ministers of the second rank, on
whom their master was willing to confer a degree of dignity and re-
spectability, which, without being on a level with the character of an
embassador, immediately follows it, and yields the pre-eminence to it
alone. There are also envoys ordinary and extraordinary; and it appears
to be the intention of princes that the latter should be held in greater
consideration. This likewise depends on custom.
The word Resident formerly related only to the continuance of the
minister’s stay; and it is frequent in history for embassadors in ordinary
to be designated by the simple title of residents. But since the practice
of employing different orders of ministers has been generally estab-
lished, the name of resident has been conﬁned to ministers of a third
order, to whose character general custom has annexed a lesser degree of
§71.
Embassadors.
§72. Envoys.
§73.
Residents.


692
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
respectability. The resident does not represent the prince’s person in his
dignity, but only in his affairs. His representation is in reality of thesame
nature as that of the envoy: wherefore we often term him, as well as the
envoy, a minister of the second order,—thus distinguishing only two
classes of public ministers, the former consisting of embassadors who
are invested with the representative character in pre-eminence, thelatter
comprising all other ministers who do not possess that exalted character.
This is the most necessary distinction, and indeed the only essentialone.
Lastly, a custom of still more recent origin has introduced a new kind
of ministers without any particular determination of character. These
are called simply ministers, to indicate that they are invested with the
general quality of a sovereign’s mandatories, without any particular as-
signment of rank and character. It was likewise the punctilio of cere-
mony which gave rise to this innovation. Use had established particular
modes of treatment for the embassador, the envoy, and the resident.
Disputes between ministers of the several princes often arose on this
head, and especially about rank. In order to avoid all contest on certain
occasions when there might be room to apprehend it, the expedient was
adopted of sending ministers not invested with any one of the three
known characters. Hence they are not subjected to any settled cere-
monial, and can pretend to no particular treatment. The minister rep-
resents his master in a vague and indeterminate manner, which cannot
be equal to the ﬁrst degree; consequently he makes no demur in yielding
pre-eminence to the embassador. He is entitled to the general regarddue
to a conﬁdential person intrusted by a sovereign with the management
of his affairs; and he possesses all the rights <461> essential to the char-
acter of a public minister. This indeterminate quality is such that the
sovereign may confer it on one of his servants whom he would not
choose to invest with the character of embassador: and, on the other
hand, it may be accepted by a man of rank, who would be unwilling to
undertake the ofﬁce of resident, and to acquiesce in the treatment at
present allotted to men in that station. There are also ministers pleni-
potentiary, and of much greater distinction than simple ministers.These
also are without any particular attribution of rank and character, but by
custom are now placed immediately after the embassador, or on a level
with the envoy extraordinary.
§74. Ministers.


chapter vi
693
We have spoken of consuls in treating of commerce (Book II. §34).
Formerly agents were a kind of public ministers; but in the present in-
crease and profusion of titles, this is given to persons simply appointed
by princes to transact their private affairs, and who not unfrequentlyare
subjects of the country where they reside. They are not public ministers,
and consequently not under the protection of the law of nations. But a
more particular protection is due to them than to other foreigners or
citizens, and likewise some attentions in consideration of the prince
whom they serve. If that prince sends an agent with credentials and on
public business, the agent thenceforward becomes a public minister; his
title making no difference in the case. The same remark is alsoapplicable
to deputies, commissioners, and others intrusted with the management
of public affairs.
Among the several characters established by custom, it rests with the
sovereign to determine with what particular one he chooses to invest his
minister; and he makes known the minister’s character in the credentials
which he gives him for the sovereign to whom he sends him. Credentials
are the instrument which authorises and establishes the minister in his
character with the prince to whom they are addressed. If that prince
receives the minister, he can receive him only in the quality attributed
to him in his credentials. They are, as it were, his general letter of at-
torney, his mandate patent, mandatum manifestum.
The instructions given to the minister contain his master’s secret man-
date, theorderstowhich theministermustcarefullyconform,andwhich
limit his powers. Here we might apply all the rules of the law of nature
respecting procurations and mandates, whether open or secret. But ex-
clusive of their being more particularly applicable to the subject of trea-
ties, we may with the less impropriety dispense with such details in this
work, as the custom has wisely been established, that no engagements
into which a minister may enter, shall have any validity between sov-
ereigns, unless ratiﬁed by his principal.
We have seen above that every sovereign, every community, and even
every individual, who has a right to treat with foreign powers, has also
that of sending embassadors. (See the preceding chapter.) The question
admits of nodifﬁculty, so farasrespectssimpleministersormandatories,
considered in general as persons <462> intrusted with the affairs, and
§75. Consuls,
agents, depu-
ties, commis-
sioners, &c.
§76.
Credentials.
§77.
Instructions.
§78. Right
of sending
embassadors.


694
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
vested with the powers, of those who have a right to treat. Further, the
ministers of every sovereign are, without hesitation, allowed to enjoy all
the rights and prerogatives belonging to ministers of the second order.
Powerful monarchs indeed deny tosomepettystatestherightof sending
embassadors: but let us see with what reason. According to the generally
established custom, the embassador is a public minister representingthe
person and dignity of a sovereign; and, as this representative character
procures him particular honours, great princes are therefore unwilling
to admit the embassador of an inconsiderable state, from a repugnance
to paying him honours of so distinguished a kind. But it is manifestthat
every sovereign has an equal right of causing himself to be represented
in the ﬁrst as well as in the second or the third degree: and the sovereign
dignity is entitled to distinguished respect in the great societyof nations.
We have shewn (Book II. Ch. III.) that the dignity of independent na-
tions is essentially the same; that a sovereign prince, however lowhemay
rank in the scale of power, is as completely sovereign and independent
as the greatest monarch, in the same manner as a dwarf is a man equally
with a giant; although indeed the political giant makes a more conspic-
uous ﬁgure in the general society than the dwarf, and has, on that ac-
count, a greater portion of respect and more signal honours paid tohim.
It is evident then that every prince, every state, truly possessed of sov-
ereignty, has a right to send embassadors, and that to contest their right
in this instance is doing them a very great injury; it is, in fact, contesting
their sovereign dignity. And if they have that right, their embassadors
cannot be refused those regards and honours which custom particularly
assigns to the representative of a sovereign. The king of France admits
no embassadors from the princes of Germany, as refusing to their min-
isters the honours annexed to the ﬁrst degree of representation; yet he
receives embassadors from the princes of Italy. The reason alleged for
this conduct is that he considers the latter to be more perfectly sovereign
princes than the former, because, though equally vassals of the emperor
and the empire, they are not equally dependent on the imperial au-
thority. The emperors, nevertheless, claim the same rights over the
princes of Italy, as over those of Germany. But France, seeing that the
former do not actually constitute a part of the Germanic body, nor assist


chapter vi
695
at the diets, countenances their absolute independence, inorderasmuch
as possible to detach them from the empire.
I shall not here enter into a detail of the honours due and actually
paid to embassadors: these are matters which altogether depend on in-
stitution and custom: I shall only observe, in general, that they are en-
titled to those civilities and distinctions which usage and the prevailing
manners of the time have pointed out as proper expressions of the re-
spect due to the representative of a sovereign. And it must be observed
here, with regard to things <463> of institution and custom, that, when
a practice is so established, as to impart, according to the usages and
manners of theage, a real valueandasettledsigniﬁcationtothingswhich
are in their own nature indifferent, the natural and necessary law of na-
tions requires that we should pay deference to such institution, and act,
with respect to such things, in the samemanner asif theyreallypossessed
all that value which the opinion of mankind has annexed to them. For
instance, according to the general usage of all Europe it is the peculiar
prerogative of an embassador to wear his hat in presence of the prince
to whom he is sent. This right expresses that he is acknowledged as the
representative of a sovereign: to refuse it therefore to the embassador of
a state which is truly independent, would be doinganinjurytothatstate,
and, in some measure, degrading it. The Switzers, who formerly were
much deeper adepts in the art of war than in the etiquette of courts,and
far from being punctilious on the score of mereceremony,have,onsome
occasions, submitted to be treated in a manner unbecoming the dignity
of their nation. In 1663, their embassadors suffered the king of France,
and the nobles of his court, to refuse them those honours which custom
has rendered essential to the embassadors of sovereigns, and particularly
that of being covered before the king at their audience.* Some of their
number, who knew better what they owed to the glory of their republic,
strongly insisted on that essential and distinctive honour: but the opin-
* In Wicquefort, may be seen a particular account of the whole transaction. That
writer is justiﬁable in expressing a degree of indignation against the Swiss embassa-
dors: but he ought not to have insulted the whole nation by coarsely asserting that
“they prefer money to honour.” Embassad. book i. §19. See also §18.
§79. Honours
due to em-
bassadors.

696
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
ion of the majority prevailed, and at length they all yielded, on being
assured that the embassadors of their nation had not worn their hats in
presence of Henry the Fourth. Allowing the fact to have been true, the
argument was not unanswerable. The Switzers might have replied, that
in Henry’s time their nation was not yet solemnly acknowledged free
and independent of the empire, as it had lately been by the treaty of
Westphalia in 1648. They might have said, that, although their prede-
cessors had not been duly attentive to support the dignity of their sov-
ereigns, that gross error could not impose on their successors any obli-
gation to commit a similar one. At present, as the nation is more
enlightened, and more attentive to points of that nature, she will not
fail to support her dignity in a more becoming manner. Whatever ex-
traordinary honours may in other respects be paid to her embassadors,
she will not in future suffer herself to be so far blinded by those empty
marks of distinction, as to overlook that peculiar prerogative whichcus-
tom has rendered essential. When Louis the Fifteenth visited Alsace in
1744, the Helvetic body declined sending embassadors to compliment
him according to custom, until informedwhethertheywouldbeallowed
to wear their hats: and on the refusal of <464> that just demand, none
were sent. Switzerland may reasonably hope that his most christian maj-
esty will no longer insist on a claim which does not enhance the lustre
of his crown, and can only serve to degrade an ancient and faithful ally.
chapter vii
Of the Rights, Privileges, and Immunities of
Embassadors and other Public Ministers.
The respect which is due to sovereigns should redound to their repre-
sentatives, and especially their embassadors, as representing their mas-
ter’s person in the ﬁrst degree. Whoever offends and insults a public
minister, commits a crime the more deserving of severe punishment, as
he might thereby involve his country and his sovereign in very serious
difﬁculties and trouble. It is just that he should be punished for his fault,
§80. Respect
due to public
ministers.


chapter vii
697
and that the state should, at the expense of the delinquent, give full
satisfaction to the sovereign who has been offended in the person of his
minister. If the foreign minister is himself the aggressor, and offends a
citizen, the latter may oppose him without departing from the respect
due to the character which the offender bears, and give him a lesson
which shall both efface the stain of the outrage, and make the author of
it blush for his misconduct. The person offended may further prefer a
complaint to his own sovereign, who will demand for him an adequate
satisfaction from the minister’s master. The great concerns of the state
forbid a citizen, on such occasions, to entertain those thoughts of re-
venge which the point of honour might suggest, although they should
in other respects be deemed allowable. Even according to the maxims
of the world, a gentleman is not disgraced by an affront for which it is
not in his own power to procure satisfaction.
The necessity and right of embassies being established (see Chap. V.
of this Book), the perfect security and inviolability of embassadors and
other ministers is a certain consequence of it: for if their persons be not
protected from violence of every kind, the right of embassy becomes
precarious, and the success very uncertain. A right to the endinseparably
involves a right to the necessary means. Embassies then being of such
great importance in the universal society of nations, and so necessary to
their common well-being, the persons of ministers charged with those
embassies are to be held sacred and inviolable among all nations (see
Book II. §218). Whoever offers violence to an embassador, or to any
other public minister, not only injures the sovereign whom thatminister
represents, but also attacks the common <465> safety and well-being of
nations: he becomes guilty of an atrocious crime against mankind in
general.*
* An enormous infraction of the law of nations caused the ruin of the powerful
empire of Khovarezm or Kakesm, and opened a door to the Tartars for the subju-
gation of almost all Asia. The famous Gengis-khan,wishingtoestablishacommercial
intercourse between his states and those of Persia and the other provinces subject to
Mohammed Cotheddin, sultan of Khovarezm, sent to that prince an embassador
accompanied by a caravan of merchants. On the arrival of that caravan at Otraw, the
governor caused them to be arrested, together with the embassador, and wrote word
§81. Their
persons sacred
and inviolable.


698
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
This safety is particularly due to the minister, from the sovereign to
whom he is sent. To admit a minister, to acknowledge him in such char-
acter, is engaging to grant him the most particular protection, and that
he shall enjoy all possible safety. It is true, indeed, that the sovereign is
bound to protect every person within his dominions, whether native or
foreigner, and to shelter him from violence: but this attention is in a
higher degree due to a foreign minister. An act of violence done to a
private person is an ordinary transgression, which, according to circum-
stances, the prince may pardon: but if done to a public minister, it is a
crime of state, an offence against the law of nations; and the power of
pardoning, in such case, does not rest with the prince in whose domin-
ions the crime has been committed, butwith himwhohasbeenoffended
in the person of his representative. However, if the minister has been
insulted by persons who were ignorant of his character, the offence is
wholly unconnected with the law of nations, and falls within the class
of ordinary transgressions. A company of young rakes, in a town of
Switzerland, having, in the night-time, insulted the British minister’s
house without knowing who lived in it, the magistracy sent a message
to the minister, to know what satisfaction he required. He prudently
answered, that it was the magistrates’ concern to provide for the public
safety by such means as they thought best; but that, as to his own part,
he required nothing, not thinking himself affronted by persons who
could have had no design against him, as not knowing his house. An-
other particular circumstance in the protection due to foreign ministers,
to the sultan that they were a company of spies. Mohammed thereupon ordered him
to have the prisoners put to death. Gengis-khan demanded satisfaction of the sultan
for this barbarous massacre; and, ﬁnding him backward to give it, he took up arms.
The conquest of the whole empire of Khovarezm soon followed; and Mohammed
himself, reduced to the condition of a wretched fugitive, died of a broken heart in a
desert island of the Caspian sea.
Canson, the last sultan of the Mammelucs, having put to death the embassadors
of the Turkish emperor Selim the First, the injured monarch took a signal vengeance
for the atrocious deed. He conquered all the dominions of Canson, and having de-
feated and captured that prince near Cairo, he caused him to be hanged at one of the
gates of the city. Marigny [[Franc¸ois Augier de Marigny]], Hist. of the Arabs, vol. ii.
pp. 105, 427. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§82. Particular
protection due
to them.

chapter vii
699
is this:—according to the destructive maxims introduced by a falsepoint
of honour, a sovereign is under a necessity of shewing indulgence to a
person wearing a sword, who instantly revenges an affront done to him
by a private individual: but violent proceedings against a publicminister
can never be allowed or ex-<466>cused, unless where the latter hashim-
self been the aggressor, and, by using violence in the ﬁrst instance, has
reduced his opponent to the necessity of self-defence.
Though the minister’s character is not displayed in its full extent,and
does not thus ensure him the enjoyment of all his rights, till he is ac-
knowledged and admitted by the sovereign, to whom he delivers his cre-
dentials,—yet, on his entering the country to which he is sent, and mak-
ing himself known, he is under the protection of the law of nations;
otherwise it would not be safe for him to come. Until he has had his
audience of the prince, he is, on his own word, to be considered as a
minister; and besides, exclusive of the noticeof hismissionusuallygiven
by letter, the minister has, in case of doubt, his passports to produce,
which will sufﬁciently certify his character.
These passports sometimes become necessary to him in the countries
through which he passes on his way to the place of his destination; and,
in case of need, he shews them, in order to obtain the privilegestowhich
he is entitled. It is true, indeed, that the prince alone to whom the min-
ister is sent, is under any obligation or particular engagement to ensure
him the enjoyment of all the rights annexed to his character. Yet the
others through whose dominions he passes, are not to deny him those
regards to which the minister of a sovereign is entitled, and which na-
tions reciprocally owe to each other. In particular they are bound to af-
ford him perfect security. To insult him, would be injuring his master,
and the whole nation to which he belongs: to arrest him and offer him
violence, would be infringing the right of embassy, which belongs to all
sovereigns (§§57, 63). The French monarch, Francis the First, had there-
fore very good reason to complain of the murder of his embassadors
Rincon and Fregose, as an atrocious violation of public faith and of the
law of nations. Those two ministers, the one destined for Constanti-
nople, the other for Venice, having embarked on the Po, were stopped
and murdered; and, according to all appearances, the deed had beenper-
§83. When it
commences.
§84. What is
due to them
in countries
through which
they pass.


700
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
petrated by order of the governor of Milan.* The emperor Charles the
Fifth having taken no pains to discover the persons concerned in the
murder, authorised a belief that he had himself ordered it, or at least
that he tacitly approved of the act after its commission. And as he did
not give any suitable satisfaction for it, Francis had a very just cause for
declaring war against him, and even calling for the assistance of all other
nations: for an affair of this nature is not a private dispute, a doubtful
question in which each party pretends to have justice on his side: it is a
quarrel which involves the concern of all nations, since they are all
equally interested in maintaining the sacred inviolability of that right
and of those means which enable them to hold communication with
each other, and to treat of their affairs. If an in-<467>nocent passage,
and even perfect security, are due to a private individual, much more are
they due to the minister of a sovereign, who is going to execute his mas-
ter’s orders, and who travels on the affairs of a nation. I say, “aninnocent
passage”: for the minister’s journey is justly suspected, if a sovereign has
reason to apprehend that he will make an improper use of the liberty
granted him of entering his territories, by plotting against his interests
while in the country, or that he is going to convey intelligence to his
enemies, or to stir up others against him. We have already said (§64)that
he may in such case refuse him a passage: but he is not to maltreat him,
nor suffer any violence to be offered to his person. If he has not reason
sufﬁcient for denying him a passage, he may take precautions againstthe
abuse which the minister might make of it. These maxims theSpaniards
found established in Mexico, and the neighbouring provinces. In those
countries, embassadors were respected throughout their whole journey;
but they could not deviate from the high road without forfeiting their
rights:†—a prudent and judicious reservation, introduced as a guard
against the admission of spies under the name of embassadors. Thus,
while the negotiations for peace were carried on at the famous congress
of Westphalia amidst the dangers of war and the din of arms, theseveral
couriers sent or received by the plenipotentiaries had each his particular
* Memoires de Martin du Bellay, liv. ix.
† Solis’s history of the Conquest of Mexico.


chapter vii
701
route designated; and out of the prescribed tract, his passport could af-
ford him no protection.*
What we have here observed, relates to nations that are at peace with
each other. On the breaking out of a war, we cease to be under any
obligation of leaving the enemy in the free enjoyment of his rights: on
the contrary, we are justiﬁable in depriving him of them, for thepurpose
of weakening him, and reducing him to accept of equitable conditions.
His people may also be attacked and seized wherever we have a right to
commit acts of hostility. Not only, therefore, may we justly refuse a pas-
sage to the ministers whom our enemy sends to other sovereigns;wemay
even arrest them if they attempt to pass privately, and without permis-
sion, through places belonging to our jurisdiction. Of such proceeding
the last war furnishes a signal instance. A French embassador, on his
route to Berlin, touched, through the imprudence of his guides, at a
village within the electorate of Hanover, whose sovereign, the king of
England, was at war with France. The minister was there arrested, and
afterwards sent over to England. As his Britannic majesty had in that
instance only exerted the rights of war, neither the court of France nor
that of Prussia complained of his conduct.
The reasons which render embassies necessary, and embassadors sa-
cred and inviolable, are not less cogent in time of war than <468> in
profound peace. On the contrary, the necessity and indispensable duty
of preserving some resource by which the minds of the belligerent par-
ties may be brought to a mutual understanding, and peace be restored,
is a fresh reason why the persons of ministers, as instruments in the pre-
liminary conferences and ﬁnal reconciliation, should be stillmoresacred
and inviolable. Nomen legati, says Cicero, ejusmodi esse debet, quod, non
modo inter sociorum jura, sed etiam inter hostium tela, incolume versetur.†
Accordingly, one of the most sacred laws of war is that which ensures
perfect security to persons who bring messages or proposals from the
* Wicquefort’s Embassador, b. i. §17.
† In Verrem, orat. i. [[Orat. II, 1.85: “The very name legatus should inspire such
respect that its bearer should be able to move unharmed not only among allies who
acknowledge our rights but among enemies whose swords are drawn against us!”]]
§85. Embassa-
dors going to
an enemy’s
country.
§86. Embas-
sies between
enemies.


702
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
enemy. It is true, indeed, that the embassador of an enemy must not
approach without permission: and as there does not always exist a con-
venient opportunity of obtaining such permission through the medium
of neutral persons, the defect has been supplied by the establishment of
certain privileged messengers for carrying proposals from enemy to en-
emy, in perfect safety.
The privileged messengers I allude to are heralds, trumpeters, and
drummers, who, from the moment they make themselves known, and
as long as they conﬁne themselves within the terms of theircommission,
are, by the laws of war and those of nations, considered as sacred and
inviolable. This regulation is absolutely necessary: for, exclusive of the
duty incumbent on us to reserve the means of restoring peace (as above
mentioned), there occur, even during the course of the war, a thousand
occasions, when the common safety and advantage of both parties re-
quire that they should be able to send messages and proposals to each
other. The institution of heralds succeeded that of the Roman feciales:
at present, however, they are seldom employed: drummersortrumpeters
are sent, and, after them, according to the exigence of theoccasion,min-
isters, or ofﬁcers furnished with powers. Those drummers and trum-
peters are held sacred and inviolable; but they are to make themselves
known by the marks peculiar to them. Maurice, prince of Orange,15
highly resented the conduct of the garrison of Ysendick, who had ﬁred
at his trumpeter:* on which occasion the prince observed that no pun-
ishment can be too severe for those who violate the lawof nations.Other
instances may be seen in Wicquefort, and particularly the reparation
which the duke of Savoy, as general of Charles the Fifth’s army, caused
to be made to a French trumpeter, who had been dismounted and de-
spoiled by some German soldiers.†
* Wicquefort, book i. §3.
† Ibid.
15. Maurice, prince of Orange, r. 1618–25.
§87. Heralds,
trumpeters,
and drummers.


chapter vii
703
In the wars of the Netherlands the duke of Alva hanged up a trum-
peter belonging to the prince of Orange, saying that he was not obliged
to allow safety to a trumpeter sent him by the chief of the rebels.* On
this as on many other occasions, that sanguinary general was undoubt-
edly guilty of a ﬂagrant violation of the laws of war, which, as we have
proved above (Book III. <469> Chap. XVIII.), ought to be observed
even in civil wars: for, unless both parties can with perfect safety inter-
change messages and reciprocally send conﬁdential persons to each
other, how can they, on those unfortunate occasions, ever come to talk
of peace? what channel remains open for negotiating a salutary accom-
modation? The same duke of Alva, in the war which the Spaniards af-
terwards made on the Portuguese16 whom they also termed rebels,
caused the governor of Cascais to be hanged for having given orders to
ﬁre on a trumpeter sent to demand a surrender of the town.† In a civil
war, or when a prince takes up arms for the purpose of subduing a body
of people who think themselves absolved from their allegiance to him,
an attempt to compel the enemies to respect the laws of war while he
himself does not observe them on his own part, is in fact equal to a
determined resolution of carrying those wars to the extreme of cruelty,
and converting them into a scene of inordinate and endless murder, by
the long series of mutual retaliations which will naturally ensue.
But, as a prince, when inﬂuenced by substantial reasons, may refuse
to admit and listen to embassadors, in like manner the general of an
army, or any other commander, is not always obliged to permit the ap-
proach of a trumpeter or drummer, and to give him a hearing. If, for
instance, the governor of a besieged town is apprehensive that a sum-
mons to surrender may intimidate the garrison, and excite premature
ideas of capitulation, he undoubtedly may, on seeing the trumpeter ad-
vance, send him orders to retire, informinghimthatif hecomesasecond
time on the same errand and without permission, he shall be ﬁred upon.
This conduct is no violation of the laws of war: but such a mode of
* Ibid.
† Wicquefort, book i.
16. In 1580–81.
§88. Ministers,
trumpeters,
&c. to be
respected even
in a civil war.
§89. Some-
times they may
be refused
admittance.


704
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
proceeding ought not to be adopted without very cogent reasons, be-
cause, by irritating the besiegers, it exposes the garrison to be treated by
them with the extreme of rigour, untempered with mercy or modera-
tion. To refuse to hear a trumpeter’s message without alleging a sub-
stantial reason for the refusal, is equivalent to a declaration that theparty
is determined to persevere in irreconcilable hostility.
Whether we admit or refuse to hear a herald or a trumpeter, we ought
carefully to avoid every thing which might wear the appearance of an
insultoffered tohim. Notonlydoesthelawof nationsclaimthatrespect,
but prudence moreover recommends such caution and delicacy.In1744,
the Bailly de Givry sent a trumpeter with an ofﬁcer to summon the re-
doubt of Pierre-longe in Pie´mont. The Savoyard ofﬁcer who com-
manded intheredoubt, abraveman, butof abluntandﬁerydisposition,
feeling his indignation roused by a summons to surrender a post which
he deemed tenable and secure, returned an insulting answer to the
French general. The ofﬁcer to whom the answer was given, judiciously
took advantage of the circumstance, and delivered it to the Bailly de
Givry in the hearing of the French <470> troops. It set them in a ﬂame;
and their native valour being stimulated by the eager desire of avenging
an affront, their impetuosity was irresistible: though the attack was at-
tended with considerable carnage, the losses they sustained only added
fresh fuel to their courage, till at length they carried the redoubt: and
thus the imprudent commandant was accessary to his own death, the
slaughter of his men, and the loss of his post.
The prince, the general of the army, and every commander in chief
within his department, have alone the right of sending a trumpeter or
drummer; and, on the other hand, it is only to the commander in chief
that they can send such messengers. Should a general, besieging a town,
attempt to send a trumpeter to any subaltern, to the magistracy, or the
townsmen, the governor might justly treat that trumpeter as a spy. The
French monarch, Francis the First, while engaged in war with Charles
the Fifth, sent a trumpeter to the diet of the empire, then assembled at
Spires. The trumpeter was seized by order of the emperor, who threat-
ened to hang him because he was not sent to him.* But he did not dare
* Wicquefort, ubi supra.
§90. Every
thing which
has the appear-
ance of insult
to them, must
be avoided.
§91. By and to
whom they
may be sent.


chapter vii
705
toputhisthreatinexecution;for,loudlyashecomplainedonthesubject,
he was nevertheless convinced in his own mind that the diet had a right,
even without his consent, to listen to the proposals brought by a trum-
peter. On the other hand, a drummer or trumpeter from a subaltern is
seldom received, unless for some particular object depending on the
present authority of that subaltern acting in his function. At the siege
of Rhynberg in 1598, a colonel of a Spanish regiment having takenupon
him to summon the town, the governor sent the drummer orders to
withdraw, informing him at the same time, that, if any other drummer
or trumpeter had the audacity to come on the same errand from a sub-
altern, he would cause the messenger to be hanged.*
The inviolability of a public minister,—or the protection to which
he has a more sacred and particular claimthanany otherperson,whether
native or foreigner,—is not the only privilege he enjoys: the universal
practice of nations allows him moreover an entire independence on the
jurisdiction and authorityof thestateinwhichheresides.Someauthors†
maintain that this independence is merely a matter of institution be-
tween different states, and will have it referred to the arbitrary law of
nations, which owes its origin to manners, customs, or particular con-
ventions: in a word, they deny it to be grounded on the natural law of
nations. It is true, indeed, that the law of nature gives men a right to
punish those who injure them: consequently it empowers sovereigns to
punish any foreigner who disturbs the public tranquillity, who offends
them, or maltreats their subjects: it authorises them to compel such for-
eigner to <471> conform to the laws, and to behave properly towards
the citizens. But it is no less true, that the natural law at the same time
imposes on all sovereigns the obligation of consenting to those things
without which it would be impossible for nations to cultivate thesociety
that nature has established among them,—to keep up a mutual corre-
spondence,—to treat of their affairs, or to adjust their differences.Now,
embassadors and other public ministers are necessary instruments for
the maintenance of that general society, of that mutual correspondence
between nations. But their ministry cannot effect the intended purpose,
* Idem, ibid.
† See Wolf, Jus Gent. §1059.
§92. Indepen-
dence of
foreign
ministers.


706
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
unless it be invested with all the prerogatives which are capable of en-
suring its legitimate success, and of enabling the minister freely and
faithfully to discharge his duty in perfect security. The law of nations,
therefore, while it obliges us tograntadmissiontoforeignministers,does
also evidently oblige us to receive those ministers in full possession of
all the rights which necessarily attach to their character,—all the privi-
leges requisite for the due performance of their functions. It is easy to
conceive that independence must be one of those privileges; since,with-
out it, that security which is so necessary to a public minister, would be
enjoyed on a very precarious footing. He might be molested,persecuted,
maltreated, under a thousand pretences. A ministerisoftenchargedwith
commissions that are disagreeable to the prince to whom he is sent. If
that prince has any power over him, and especially a sovereignauthority,
how is it to be expected that the minister can execute his master’s orders
with due ﬁdelity, ﬁrmness, and freedom of mind? It is a matter of no
small importance that he have no snares to apprehend,—that he be not
liable to be diverted from his functions by any chicanery,—that he have
nothing to hope, nothing to fear, from the sovereign to whom he is sent.
In order, therefore, to the success of his ministry, he must be indepen-
dent of the sovereign authority and of the jurisdiction of the country,
both in civil and criminal matters. To this it may be added, that the
nobility and other persons of eminence would be averse to undertaking
an embassy, if such commission were to subject them to a foreign au-
thority,—not unfrequently in countries where they have littlefriendship
to expect for their own nation, andwheretheymustsupportdisagreeable
claims, and enter into discussions naturally productive of acrimony. In
a word, if an embassador may be indicted for ordinary offences,becrim-
inally prosecuted, taken into custody, punished,—if he may be sued in
civil cases,—the consequence will often be, that he will neither possess
the power, the leisure, nor the freedom of mind, which his master’s af-
fairs require. And how shall he be able to support the dignity of repre-
sentation in such a state of subjection?—On the whole, therefore, it is
impossible to conceive that the prince who sends an embassador or any
other minister, can have any intention of subjectinghimtotheauthority
of a foreign power: and this consideration furnishes an additional ar-


chapter vii
707
gument which completely establishesthe<472>independencyof apub-
lic minister. If it cannot be reasonably presumed that his sovereign
means to subject him to the authority of the prince to whom he is sent,
the latter, in receiving the minister, consents to admit him on thefooting
of independency: and thus there exists between the two princes a tacit
convention which gives a new force to the natural obligation.
The established practice is perfectly conformable to the principles
here laid down. All sovereigns claim a perfect independency for their
embassadors and ministers. If it be true that there was a king of Spain,
who, from adesire of arrogatingtohimself ajurisdictionovertheforeign
ministers resident at his court, wrote to all the christian princes, inform-
ing them that if his embassadors should commit any crime in the places
of their respective residence, it was his pleasure that they should forfeit
all their privileges, and be tried according to the laws of the country,*—
one solitary instance is of no weight in an affair of this nature; nor have
his successors on the Spanishthroneadoptedasimilarmodeof thinking.
This independency of the foreign minister is not to be convertedinto
licentiousness: it does not excuse him from conforming to the customs
and laws of the country in all his external actions, so far as they are un-
connected with the object of his mission and character:—he is inde-
pendent; but he has not a right to do whatever he pleases. Thus, for
instance, if there exist a general prohibition against passing in a carriage
near a powder magazine, or over a bridge,—against walking round and
examining the fortiﬁcations of a town, &c.—the embassador is bound
to respect such prohibitions.† Should he forget his duty,—should he
* The fact is advanced by Antony de Vera, in his “Idea of a Perfect Embassador”:
but Wicquefort suspects the authenticity of the anecdote,—not having, as he says,
met with it in any other writer. Embassad. book i. §29.
† The king of England having received information that the French and Spanish
embassadors had severally collected considerable numbers of armed men for the pur-
pose of supporting on a solemn occasion their respective claims to precedency, made
a general request to all the foreign ministers not to send their carriages to attend the
public entry of the Venetian embassador. The count D’Estrades, atthattimeminister
from the court of France, having complied with his majesty’s desire,—Louis XIV.
testiﬁed his dissatisfaction at the deference paid by the count to the Britishmonarch’s
message, “which was no more than a simple request not to send carriages;—whereas,
§93. How
the foreign
minister is
to behave.

708
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
grow insolent and be guilty of irregularities and crimes,—there are, ac-
cording to the nature and importance of his offences, various modes of
repressing him: and these we shallspeakof, afterwehavesaidafewwords
concerning the line of conduct to be pursued by a public minister in the
place of his residence. He must not avail himself of his independency
for <473> the purpose of violating the laws and customs; he should
rather punctually conform to them as far as they may concern him, al-
though the magistrate has no compulsive power over him; and he is es-
pecially bound to a religious observance of the rules of justice towards
all who have any dealings with him. As to what concerns the prince to
whom he is sent, the embassador should remember that his ministry is
a ministry of peace, and that it is on that footing only he is received.
This reason forbids his engaging in any evil machinations:—let him
serve his master without injuring the prince who receives him. It is abase
treachery to take advantage of the inviolability of the embassadorial
character, for the purpose of plotting in security the ruin of those who
respect that character,—of laying snares for them,—of clandestinelyin-
juring them,—of embroiling and ruining their affairs. What would be
infamous and abominable in a private guest, shall that be allowable and
becoming in the representative of a sovereign?
Here arises an interesting question.—It is but too common for em-
bassadors to tamper with the ﬁdelity of the ministers of the court to
which they are sent, and of the secretaries and other persons employed
in the public ofﬁces. What ideas are we to entertain of this practice? To
corrupt a person,—to seduce him,—to engage him by the powerful al-
lurement of gold to betray his prince and violate hisduty,—is,according
to all the established principles of morality, undoubtedly a wicked ac-
even if he had issued an express order (as being at liberty to give what ordershepleases
in his own kingdom), you should have replied that you receive no commands but
from me: and if, after that, he had attempted to use violence, the part whichremained
for you to act, was that of withdrawingfromhiscourt.”—IthinktheFrenchmonarch
entertained erroneous ideas on the subject; since every sovereign must surely have a
right to prohibit all foreign ministers doing any thing in his dominions which may
tend to produce disorder, and which, moreover, is not necessary to the exercise of
their ministerial functions. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
chapter vii
709
tion. How comes it then that so little scruple is made of it in public
affairs? A wise and virtuous politician* sufﬁcientlygivesustounderstand
that he absolutely condemns that scandalous resource: but, fearful of
provoking the whole tribe of politicians to assail him at once like a nest
of hornets, he proceeds no farther than barely advisingthemnottoprac-
tise such manoeuvres except when every other resource fails. As to me,
whose pen is employed in developing the sacred and immutable prin-
ciples of justice, I must, in duty to the moral world, openly aver that the
mode of corruption is directly repugnant to all the rules of virtue and
probity, and a ﬂagrant violation of the law of nature. It is impossible to
conceive an act of a more ﬂagitious nature, or more glaringly militant
against the reciprocal duties of men, than that of inducing any one to
do evil. The corruptor is undoubtedly guilty of a crime against the
wretch whom he seduces: and as to the sovereign whose secrets are thus
treacherously explored,isitnotbothanoffenceandaninjurycommitted
against him, to abuse the friendly reception given at his court, and to
take advantage of it for the purpose of corrupting the ﬁdelity of his
servants? He has a right to banish the corruptor from hisdominions,and
to demand justice of his employer.
If ever bribery be excusable, it is when it happens to be the only pos-
sible mode by which we can completely discover and <474> defeat a
heinous plot, capable of ruining or materially endangering the state in
whose service we are employed. In the conduct of him who betrays such
a secret, there may, according to circumstances, be no criminality. The
great and lawful advantage accruing from the action which we induce
him to perform, together with the urgent necessity of having recourse
to it, may dispense with our paying too scrupulous an attention to the
questionable complexion of the deed on his part. To gain him over, is
no more than an act of simple and justiﬁable self-defence. It every day
happens, that, in order to foil the machinations of wicked men, we ﬁnd
ourselves under a necessity of turning to our account the vicious dis-
positions of men of similar stamp. On this footing it was, that Henry
the Fourth said to the Spanish minister that “it is justiﬁable conduct in
* Mons. Pequet, Discours sur l’Art de negocier, p. 91.


710
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
an embassador to have recourse to bribery for the purpose of detecting
the intrigues that are carried on againsthissovereign’sinterests”;*adding
that the affair of Marseilles,17 that of Metz,18 and several others, sufﬁ-
ciently shewed that he had good reason for endeavouring to penetrate
the schemes which his enemies were plotting at Brussels againstthetran-
quillity of his kingdom. That great prince, it is to be presumed, did not
consider bribery and seduction as on all occasions excusable in a foreign
minister, since he himself gave orders for the arrest of Bruneau, the
Spanish embassador’s secretary, who had tampered with Mairargues for
the clandestine surrender of Marseilles to the Spaniards.
In barely taking advantage of the offers made to us by a traitor whom
we have not seduced, our conduct is less inconsistent with justice and
honour. But the examples of the Romans, which we havealreadyquoted
(Book III. §§155, 181), and in which there was question of declared en-
emies,—those examples, I say, sufﬁciently shew that true greatness of
soul disdains even that resource, lest the adoption of it should hold out
an encouragement to infamous treachery. A prince or a minister, whose
ideas of honour are not inferior to those of the ancient Romans above
noticed, will never stoop to embrace the proposals of a traitor, except
when compelled by some dire uncontroulable necessity: and even then
he will regret the degrading circumstance of owing his preservation to
so unworthy an expedient.
But I do not here mean to condemn an embassador for employing
civilities and polite attentions, and even presents and promises, with a
view to gain friends for his sovereign. To conciliate men’s affection and
good will, is not seducing them, or impelling them to the perpetration
of criminal deeds: and as to those new friends, it is their business to keep
a strict watch over their own hearts, lest their attachment to a foreign
prince should ever warp them from the ﬁdelity which they owe to their
lawful sovereign. <475>
* See Sully’s Memoirs, and the French historians.
17. In 1601.
18. In 1601.


chapter vii
711
Should an embassador forget the duties of his station,—should he
render himself disagreeable and dangerous,—should he formcabalsand
schemes prejudicial to the peace of the citizens, or to the state or prince
to whom he is sent,—there are various modes of punishing him, pro-
portionate to the nature and degree of his offence. If he maltreats the
subjects of the state,—if he commits any acts of injustice or violence
against them,—the injured subjects are not to seek redress from the or-
dinary magistrates, since the embassador is wholly independent of their
jurisdiction: and for the same reason, those magistrates cannot proceed
directly against him. On such occasions, therefore, the plaintiffs are to
make application to their sovereign, who demands justice from the em-
bassador’s master, and, in case of a refusal, may order the insolent min-
ister to quit his dominions.
Should a foreign minister offend the prince himself,—should he fail
in the respect which he owes him, or, by his intrigues, embroil the state
and the court,—the offended prince, from a wish to keep measures with
the offender’s sovereign, sometimes contents himself with simply re-
quiring that the minister be recalled; or if the transgression be of a more
serious nature, he forbids his appearance at court in the interval while
his master’s answer is expected; and in cases of a heinous complexion,
he even proceeds so far as to expel him from his territories.
Every sovereign has an unquestionable right to proceed in this man-
ner; for, being master in his own dominions, no foreigner can stay at his
court or in his territories, withouthispermission.Andthoughsovereigns
are generally obliged to listen to the overtures of foreign powers, and to
admit their ministers, this obligationentirelyceaseswithregardtoamin-
ister, who, being himself deﬁcient in the duties attached to his station,
becomes dangerous to or justly suspected by the sovereign, to whom he
can come in no other character than that of a minister of peace. Can a
prince be obliged to suffer that a secret enemy, who is raising distur-
bances in the state and plotting its ruin, shall remain in his dominions,
and appear at his court? Ridiculous was the answer of Philip the Second
to queen Elizabeth, on her request that he would recall his embassador
who was carrying on dangerous plots against her. The Spanish monarch
refused to recall him, saying, that “the condition of princes would be
§94. How
he may be
punished,
1. for ordinary
transgressions;
§95.
2. for faults
committed
against the
prince.
§96. Right of
ordering away
an embassador
who is guilty,
or justly
suspected.


712
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
very wretched indeed, if they were obliged to recall a minister whenever
his conduct did not suit the humour or the interest of those with whom
he was negotiating.”* Much more wretched would be the condition of
princes, if they were bound to suffer in their states, and at their court,
a minister who was disagreeable or justly suspected, an incendiary, an
enemy disguised under the character of anembassador,whoshouldavail
himself of his inviolability, for the purpose of boldly plotting schemes
of a per-<476>nicious tendency. The queen, justly offended at Philip’s
refusal, put a guard on the embassador.†
But is a prince on every occasion bound to conﬁne his resentment to
the simple expulsion of an embassador, however great the enormities of
which the latter may have been guilty?—Suchisthedoctrinemaintained
by some authors, who ground their opinion on the absolute independ-
ency of a public minister. I own he is independent of the jurisdiction
of the country: and I have already said, that, on this account, the com-
mon magistrate cannot proceed against him. I further admit, that, in all
cases of ordinary transgression, all instances of offensive or disorderly
behaviour, which, though injurious to individuals or to society, do not
endanger the safety of the state or of the sovereign, there is that degree
of respect due to the embassadorial character which is so necessary for
the correspondence of nations, and to the dignity of the prince repre-
sented, that a complaint be ﬁrst made to him of the conduct of his min-
ister, together with a demand of reparation; and that, if no satisfaction
is obtained, the offended sovereign bethencontentwithsimplyordering
the embassador to quit his dominions, in case the serious nature of the
offences absolutely require that a stop be put to them. But shall an em-
bassador be suffered with impunity to cabal against the state where he
resides, to plot its ruin, to stir up the subjects to revolt, and boldly to
foment the most dangerous conspiracies, under the assurance of being
supported by his master? If he behaves as an enemy, shall it not be al-
lowable to treat him as such? The question admits not of a doubt with
regard to an embassador who proceeds to overt acts, who takes up arms,
* Wicquefort, book i. §29.
† Idem, ibid.
§97. Right of
repressing him
by force if he
behaves as an
enemy.


chapter vii
713
and uses violence. In such case, those whom he attacks may repel him;
self-defence being authorised by the law of nature. Those Roman em-
bassadors, who, being sent to the Gauls, fought against them with the
people of Clusium, divested themselves of theembassadorialcharacter.*
Can any one therefore imagine that the Gauls were bound to spare them
in the hour of battle?
The question is more difﬁcult with respect to an embassador who,
without proceeding to overt acts, broaches plots of a dangerous ten-
dency,—who, by his occult machinations, excites the subjects to revolt,
and who forms and encourages conspiracies against the sovereign or the
state. Shall it be deemed unlawful to repress and inﬂict exemplary pun-
ishment on a traitor who abuses the sacred character with which he is
invested, and who is himself the ﬁrst to set the example of violating the
lawof nations?thatsacredlawprovidesnolessforthesafetyof theprince
who receives an embassador, than for that of the embassador himself.
But, on the other hand, if we allow the offended prince a right to punish
a foreign minister in such cases, the subjects of contest <477> and rup-
ture between sovereigns will become very frequent; and it is much to be
feared thattheembassadorialcharacterwillceasetoenjoythatprotection
and inviolability which are so essential to it. There are certain practices
connived at in foreign ministers, though not always strictly consistent
with the rules of rectitude: there are others, again, which are not to be
corrected by actual punishment, but simply by ordering the minister to
depart. How shall we, in every case, be able to ascertain the precise
boundaries of thosedifferentdegreesof transgression?Whenthereexists
a premeditated design of persecutingaminister,anodiouscolouringwill
be given to his intrigues; his intentions and proceedings will be calum-
niated by sinister constructions; even false accusations will be raised
against him. Finally, such plots as we here allude to are generally con-
ducted with caution: they are carried on so secretly, that to obtain full
proof of them is a matter of extreme difﬁculty, and indeed hardly pos-
* Livy, book v. chap. 26 [[chap. 36]], where the historianperemptorilydecidesthat
those embassadors violated the law of nations: “Legati, contra jus gentium, arma
capiunt.” [[“The legates took up arms in deﬁance of the law of nations.”]]
§98. Embas-
sador forming
dangerous
plots and
conspiracies.

714
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
sible without the formalities of justice,—formalities to whichwecannot
subject a minister who is independent of the jurisdiction of thecountry.
In laying down the grounds of the voluntary law of nations (Prelim.
§21), we have seen, that, in particular conjunctures, nations must, with
a view to the general advantage, necessarily recede from certain rights,
which, taken in themselves and abstracted from every other considera-
tion, should naturally belong tothem.Thus,althoughthesovereignwho
has justice on his side, be alone really entitled to all the rights of war
(Book III. §188), he is nevertheless obliged to look upon his enemy as
enjoying equal rights with himself, and to treat him accordingly (ibid.
§§190, 191). The same principles must be our rule in the present case.
We may therefore venture to afﬁrm, that, in consideration of the exten-
sive utility, nay the absolute necessity of embassies, sovereignsarebound
to respect the inviolability of an embassador as long as it is not incom-
patiblewiththeirownsafetyandthewelfareof theirstate.Consequently,
when the intrigues of the embassador have transpired, and his plots are
discovered,—when the danger is past, so that there no longer exists a
necessity of laying hands on him in order to guard against it,—the of-
fended sovereign ought, in consideration of theembassadorialcharacter,
to renounce his general right of punishing a traitor and a secret enemy
who conspires against the safety of the state,—and to content himself
with dismissing the guilty minister, and requiring that punishment be
inﬂicted on him by the sovereign to whose authority he is subject.
Such in fact is the mode of proceeding established by common con-
sent among the generality of nations, especially those of Europe.
Wicquefort*gives usseveralinstancesof someof theprincipalEuropean
sovereigns, who, on discovering embassadors to be guilty of odious
machinations, have limited their resentment to the expulsion of the of-
fenders, without even making <478> application to have thempunished
by their masters, of whom they did not expect to obtain a compliance
with such a demand. To these instances let us add that of the duke of
Orle´ans, regent of France.19 That prince having detected a dangerous
* Embassad. book i. §§27, 28, 29.
19. Duke of Orle´ans, r. 1715–23.
chapter vii
715
conspiracy20 which had been formed against him by the prince de Cel-
lamare, embassador from Spain, behaved with great moderation on the
occasion,—not adopting any severer measures than those of setting a
guard over the guilty minister, seizing his papers, and causing him to be
conducted out of the kingdom. Another remarkable instance, of very
ancient date, stands recorded by the Roman historians,—that in which
Tarquin’s21 embassadors were concerned. Having repaired to Rome un-
der pretence of claiming the private property belonging to their master
who had been expelled from his kingdom, they tampered with the prof-
ligate young nobility, and engaged them in a black and infamous con-
spiracy against the liberties of their country. Although such conduct
would have authorised the rulers of the Roman state to treat them as
enemies, the consuls and senate nevertheless respectedthelawof nations
in the persons of those embassadors.* The offenders were sent back to
their employer, without having received any personal injury: but, from
Livy’s account of the transaction, it appears that the letters which they
had from the conspirators to Tarquin, were taken from them.
This example leads us to the true rule of the law of nations, in the
cases now in question. An embassador cannot be punished, because he
is independent: and for the reasons we have alleged, it is not proper to
treat him as an enemy, till he himself proceeds to overt acts of violence:
but we are justiﬁable in adopting against him every measure which the
circumstances of the case may reasonably require for the purpose of de-
feating his machinations, and averting the evil which he has plotted. If,
in order to disconcert and prevent a conspiracy,itwerenecessarytoarrest
or even put to death an embassador who animates and conducts it, I do
not see why we should for a moment hesitate to take either of those
steps,—not only because the safety of the state is the supreme law, but
also because, independent of that maxim, the embassador’s own deeds
* Et quamquam visi sunt (legati) commisisse ut hostium loco essent, jus tamen
gentium valuit. [[“But, notwithstanding they appeared to have deserved nothing less
than being treated as enemies, the law of nations prevailed.”]] Tit. Liv. [[Ab urbe
condita]] lib. ii. cap. 4.
20. In 1718.
§99. What
may be
done to him
according to
the exigency
of the case.
21. Lucius Tarquinius Superbus was the last king of Rome, reigning between b.c.
535 and 510. His expulsion marked the beginning of the Roman republic.


716
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
give us a perfect and particular right to proceed to such extremities. A
public minister, I grant, is independent; and his person is sacred: but it
is unquestionably lawful to repel his attacks, whether of a secret or of
an open nature, and to defend ourselves against him, whenever he acts
either as an enemy or a traitor. And if we cannot accomplish our own
preservation without harm thence resulting to him, it is he himself who
has laid us under a necessity of not sparing him. On such an occasion,
it may with great truth be asserted that the minister has by his own act
excluded himself from the protection of the law of nations. Suppose
the Venetian senate,—though apprised of the marquis of Bedamar’s
conspiracy,22 and <479> impressed with a thorough conviction of that
minister’s being the prime mover and director of the whole business,—
had nevertheless been, in other particulars, destitute of sufﬁcient infor-
mation to enable them to crush the detestable plot,—suppose they had
been uncertain with respect to the number and rank of the conspirators,
the designs they had in agitation, and the particular quarter where the
meditated mischief was to burst forth,—whether an intention was en-
tertained of exciting a revolt among the marine or the land forces, or
effecting the clandestine capture of some important fortress,—would
they, under such circumstances, have been bound to suffer the embas-
sador to depart unmolested, and thus afford him an opportunityof join-
ing and heading his accomplices, and of bringing his designs to a suc-
cessful issue?—No man will seriously answer in the afﬁrmative:—the
senate therefore would have had a right to arrest the marquis and all his
household, and even to extort from them their detestable secret. But
those prudent republicans, seeing the danger was removed and the con-
spiracy totally suppressed, chose to keep measures with Spain:wherefore
they prohibited all accusation of the Spaniards as concerned in the plot,
and contented themselves with simply requesting the embassador to
withdraw, in order to screen himself from the rage of the populace.
In this case the same rule is to be followed, which we have already laid
down (Book III. §136) in treating of what may lawfully be done to an
enemy. Whenever an embassador acts as an enemy, we are justiﬁable in
22. In 1618.
§100. Embas-
sador attempt-
ing against the
sovereign’s life.

chapter vii
717
adopting against him every measure that is necessary for the purpose of
defeating his evil designs, and ensuring our own safety. It is on the same
principle, and under the idea which represents the embassador as a pub-
lic enemy when he behaves as such, that we proceed to determine the
treatment he ought to receive in case he pursues his criminal career to
the last stage of enormity. If an embassador commit any of those atro-
cious crimes which sap the very foundations of the general safety of
mankind,—if he attempt to assassinate or poison the prince who has
received him at his court,—he unquestionably deserves to be punished
as a treacherous enemyguiltyof poisoningorassassination(seeBook III.
§155). The embassadorial character, which he has so basely prostituted,
cannot shield him from the sword of justice. Is the law of nations to
protect such a criminal, when the personal security of all sovereigns,and
the general safety of mankind, loudly demand that his crime should be
expiated by the sacriﬁce of his forfeit life? It is true indeed that we have
little room to apprehend that a public minister will proceed to such
dreadful enormities: for it is generally men of honour who are invested
with the character of embassadors; and even if there should, among the
number, be some whose consciences are callous to every scruple, the dif-
ﬁculties, nevertheless, and the magnitude of the danger, are sufﬁcientto
deter them from the attempt. Yet such crimes are not wholly <480> un-
exampled in history. Monsieur Barbeyrac* instances the assassinationof
the lord of Sirmium by an embassador of Constantinus Diogenes, gov-
ernor of the neighbouring province for Basilius II. emperor of Con-
stantinople; and for his authority he quotes the historian Cedrenus.The
following fact is likewise to the purpose. In the year 1382, Charles III.
king of Naples, having sent to his competitor, Louis duke of Anjou, a
knight named Matthew Sauvage, in the character of a herald, to chal-
lenge him to single combat,—the herald was suspected of carrying a
demi-lance whose point was tinged with a poison of so subtle a nature,
that whoever should look stedfastly on it, or even suffer it to touch his
clothes, would instantly drop down dead. The duke, being apprised of
* In his notes on Bynkershoek’s treatise on the Competent Judgeof Embassadors,
ch. xxiv. §5, note 2.


718
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
the danger, refused to admit the herald into his presence, and ordered
him to be taken into custody. The culprit was interrogated, and, upon
his own confession, suffered the punishment of decapitation. Charles
complained of the execution of his herald, as an infraction of the laws
and usages of war: but Louis, in his reply, maintained that he had not
violated those laws in his treatment of Sauvage, who had been convicted
by his own confession.* Had the crime imputed to the herald been
clearly substantiated, he was an assassin, whom no law could protect.
But the very nature of the accusation sufﬁciently proves that it was a
false and groundless charge.
The question of which we have been treating has been debated in
England and France, on two famous occasions. In the former of those
countries, the question arose in the case of John Leslie, bishop of Ross,
embassador from Mary queen of Scots.23 That minister was continually
intriguing against queen Elizabeth, plotting against the tranquillity of
the state, forming conspiracies, and exciting the subjects to rebellion.
Five of the most able civilians, being consulted by theprivycouncil,gave
it as their opinion, that “an embassador raising a rebellion against the
prince at whose court he resides, forfeits the privileges annexed to his
character, and is subject to the punishment of the law.” They should
rather have said, that he may be treated as an enemy. But the council
contented themselves with causing the bishop to be arrested, and after
having detained him a prisoner in the Tower for two years, set him at
liberty when there was no longer any danger to be apprehended from
his intrigues, and obliged him to depart from the kingdom.† This in-
stance may serve to conﬁrm the principles which we have laid down;and
the like may be said of the following. Bruneau, secretary to the Spanish
embassador in France, was detected in the very act of treating with Mai-
rargues, in a time of profound peace, for the surrender of Marseilles to
the Spaniards. The <481> secretary was thereupon committed toprison,
* History of the Kings of the Two Sicilies, by Monsieur D’Egly [[Monthenault
D’Egly]].
† [[William Camden]] Cambden’s Annal. Angl. ad ann. 1571, 1573.
23. Mary, Queen of Scots, r. 1542–67.
§101. Two
remarkable
instances
respecting the
immunities
of public
ministers.


chapter vii
719
and was subjected to a judicial examination by the parliament before
whom Mairargues was tried. That body, however, did not pronounce
sentence of condemnation on Bruneau, but referred his case to the king,
who restored him to his master, on condition that the latter shouldorder
him to depart immediately from the kingdom. The embassador warmly
complained of the imprisonment of his secretary: but Henry IV. very
judiciously answered, that “the law of nations does not forbid putting
a public minister under an arrest, in order to hinder him from doing
mischief.” The king might have added, that a nation has even a right to
adopt, against a public minister, every measure which may be necessary
for the purpose of warding off the mischief he meditates against her,—
of defeating his projects, and preventing their evil consequences. It was
on this principle that the parliament were authorised to interrogateBru-
neau, for the purpose of discovering all the parties concerned in so dan-
gerous a conspiracy. Thequestion,whetherforeignministerswhoviolate
the law of nations do thereby forfeittheirprivileges,waswarmlydebated
at Paris: but, withoutwaitingtohavethepointdecided,thekingrestored
Bruneau to his master.*
It is not lawful to maltreat an embassador by way of retaliation: for
the prince who uses violence against a public minister, is guilty of a
crime; and we are not to take vengeance for his misconduct, by copying
* See the discussion of the question, and the discourse which Henry IV. held on
this subject, to the Spanish embassador, in the Memoires de Nevers, vol. ii. p. 858, et
seq. in Matthieu, vol. ii. book 3, and other historians.
Joseph Soﬁ, king of Carezem, having imprisoned an embassador of Timur-Bec,
Timur’s secretary of state wrote him a letter couched in strong terms of expostulation
on the subject of that infraction of the law of nations,—informing him that “it is a
maxim with kings to consider the person of anembassador assacred:forwhichreason
he is always held exempt from the punishment of death or imprisonment, if the
sovereign to whom he is sent has even the slightest knowledge of the law of nations,
or the embassador himself does but possess sufﬁcient prudence to refrain from the
commission of any heinous offence, and to behave withcommondecency.”LaCroix,
Hist. of Timur-Bec, book ii. chap. 26.—The same historian, in his account of Bar-
couc, sultan of Egypt, who put Timur’s embassador to death, observes,—“that itwas
aninfamousaction;—thattoinsultanembassador,isaviolationof thelawof nations,
and a deed at which nature herself shudders.” Ibid. book v. chap. 17. [[Thisparagraph
added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§102. Whether
reprisals may
be made on an
embassador.

720
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
his example. We never can, under pretence of retaliation, be authorised
to commit actions which are in their own nature unjustiﬁable: and such
undoubtedly would be any instance of ill-treatment inﬂicted on an un-
offending minister as a punishment for his master’s faults. If it be an
indispensable duty to pay a general regard to this rule in cases of retal-
iation, it is more particularly obligatory with regard to an embassador,
on account of the respect due to his character. TheCarthaginianshaving
violated the law of nations in the persons of the Roman embassadors,
the embassadors of that perﬁdious nation were brought to Scipio, who,
being asked how he would have them to be treated, replied, “Not in the
manner that the Carthaginians have treated ours.” Ac-<482>cordingly
he dismissed them in safety:* but at the same time he made preparations
for chastising by force of arms the state which had violated the law of
nations.† There cannot be a better pattern for sovereigns to follow on
such an occasion. If the injury for which we would makeretaliationdoes
not concern a public minister, there exists a still stronger certainty that
we must not retaliate on the embassador of the sovereign against whom
our complaint lies. The safety of public ministers would be very pre-
carious, if it were liable to be affected by every casual difference that
might arise. But there is one particular case in which it appears perfectly
justiﬁable to arrest an embassador, provided no ill treatment be given to
him in other respects. When, for instance, a prince has, in openviolation
of the law of nations, caused our embassador to be arrested, we may
arrest and detain his, as a pledge for the life and liberty of ours. But,
should this expedient prove unsuccessful, it would become our duty to
liberate the unoffending minister, and to seek redress bymoreefﬁcacious
measures. Charles the Fifth causedtheFrenchembassador,whohadmade
* Appian, quoted by Grotius, lib. ii. cap. 28, §7 [[Law of War and Peace]].—
According to Diodorus Siculus, Scipio said to the Romans, “Do not imitate that
conduct withwhichyoureproachtheCarthaginians.”Ekipiwnoukefhdeinprattein
oÿ toic Karxhdonioic egkalousi. Diod. Sic. Excerpt. Peiresc. p. 290.
† Livy, book xxx. chap. 28, §7. That historian makes Scipio say “Though the Car-
thaginians have violated the faith of the truce, and the law of nations, in the person
of our embassadors, I will do nothing against theirs that is unworthy of the maxims
of the Roman people, and of my own principles.”
chapter vii
721
him a declaration of war, to be put under an arrest; whereupon Francis
the First caused Granvelle, the emperor’s embassador, to be arrested in
like manner. At length, however, it was agreed that both those ministers
should be conducted to the frontier, and released at the same time.*
We have derived the independence and inviolability of the embas-
sadorial character from the natural and necessary principles of the law
of nations. These prerogatives are farther conﬁrmed by the uniform
practice and general consent of mankind. We have seen above (§84) that
the Spaniards found the right of embassies established and respected in
Mexico. The same principle also prevails even among the savage tribes
of North America: and if we thence turn our eye to the other extremity
of the globe, we ﬁnd that embassadors are highly respected in China. In
India also the same rule is observed, though with less scrupulous punc-
tuality:†—the king of Ceylon, for instance, has sometimes imprisoned
the embassadors of the Dutch East-India company. Being master of the
places which produce cinnamon, he knows that the Dutch, in consid-
eration of a proﬁtable commerce, will over-look many irregularities in
his conduct: and, with the true disposition of a barbarian, he takes
an undue advantage of that circumstance. The Koran enjoins the mos-
lems to respect public ministers: and if the Turks have not in all in-
<483>stances uniformly observed that precept, their violations of it are
rather imputable to the ferocity of particular princes than to the prin-
ciples of the nation at large. The rights of embassadors were formerly
very well known among the Arabs. A writer of that nation‡ relates the
following incident. Khaled, an Arabian chief, having come, in the char-
acter of embassador, to the army of theemperorHeraclius,usedinsolent
language to the general: whereupon the latter observed tohim,that“em-
bassadors were protected from all kind of violence by the law which
universally prevailed among nations: and it was probably that consid-
* Mezeray’s Hist. of France, vol. ii. p. 470.
† General Hist. of Voyages, artic. China, and Indies. [[Pre´vost, Histoire ge´ne´rale
des voyages (Paris, 1746–1801).]]
‡ Alvakedi’s History of the Conquest of Syria. [[Alvakedi was translated by Ock-
ley, and incorporated into the latter’s History of the Saracens.]]
§103. Agree-
ment of
nations con-
cerning the
privileges of
embassadors.


722
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
eration which had emboldened the Arab to speak to him in so indecent
a manner.”* It would be quite unnecessary, in this place, to accumulate
the various examples with which the history of the European nations
presents us: the enumeration would be endless; and the established cus-
toms of Europe on this subject are sufﬁcientlyknown.SaintLouis,when
at Acra in Palestine, gave a remarkable instance of the protection due to
public ministers:—an embassador from the Old Man of the Mountain,
or prince of the Assassins, speaking insolently to the French monarch,
the grand masters of theordersof theTempleandtheHospitalinformed
that minister, that, “were it not for the respect paid to the character with
which he was invested, they wouldcausehimtobethrownintothesea.”†
The king however dismissed him without suffering the slightest injury
to be done him. Nevertheless, as the prince of the Assassins was on his
own part guilty of grossly violating the most sacred rights of nations, it
would have been reasonable tosuppose thathisembassadorhadnoclaim
to protection, except indeed on this single consideration, that, as the
privilege of inviolability is founded on the necessity of keeping open a
safe channel of communication, through which sovereigns may recip-
rocally make proposals to each other, and carry on negotiations both in
peace and in war, the protection should therefore extend even to the
envoys of those princes, who, guilty themselves of violating the law of
nations, would otherwise have no title to our respect.
There are rights of another nature, which, though not necessarilyan-
nexed to the character of a public minister, are nevertheless allowed to
him by established custom in almost every country. One of theprincipal
of these is the free exercise of his religion. It is indeed highly proper that
a minister, and especially a resident minister, should enjoy the free ex-
ercise of his religion within his own house, for himself and his retinue.
But it cannot be said, that this right, like those of independence and
inviolability, is absolutely necessary to the success of his commission,
particularly in the case of a non-resident minister, the only one whom
nations are bound to admit (§66). The mi-<484>nister may, in this re-
* Ockley’s History of the Saracens, vol. i.
† Choisy’s History of St. Louis.
§104. Free
exercise of
religion.


chapter iii
93
position of the people, and other circumstances. In the Law of Nations
we must adhere to generals. We here consider the duty of a nation to-
wards itself, principally todeterminetheconductthatitoughttoobserve
in that great society which nature has established among all nations.
These duties give it rights, that serve as a rule to establish what it may
require from other nations, and reciprocally what others may require
from it.
The constitution and laws of a state are the basis of the public tran-
quillity, the ﬁrmest support of political authority, and a security for the
liberty of the citizens. But this constitution is a vain <10> phantom,and
the best laws are useless, if they be not religiously observed: the nation
ought then to watch very attentively, in order to render them equally
respected by those who govern, and by the people destined to obey. To
attack the constitution of the state, and to violate its laws, is a capital
crime against society; and if those guilty of it areinvestedwithauthority,
they add to this crime a perﬁdious abuse of the power with which they
are intrusted. The nation ought constantly to repress them with its ut-
most vigour and vigilance, as the importance of the case requires. It is
very uncommon to see the laws and constitution of a state openly and
boldly opposed: it is againstsilentandgradualattacksthatanationought
to be particularly on its guard. Sudden revolutions strike the imagina-
tions of men: they are detailed in history; their secret springs are devel-
oped. But we overlook the changes that insensibly happenbyalongtrain
of steps that are but slightly marked. It would be rendering nations an
important service, to shew from history, how many states have thus en-
tirely changed their nature, and lost their original constitution. This
would awaken the attention of man-kind:—impressed thenceforward
with this excellent maxim (no less essential in politics than in morals),
principiis obsta, 9—they would no longer shut their eyes against inno-
vations, which, though inconsiderable in themselves, may serve as steps
to mount to higher and more pernicious enterprises.
9. “Resist the ﬁrst advances.”
§30. Of the
support of the
constitution
and obedience
to the laws.


94
book i: nations in themselves
The consequences of a good or bad constitution being of such im-
portance, and the nation being strictly obliged to procure, as far as pos-
sible, the best and most convenient one, it has a right to every thing
necessary to enable it to fulﬁl this obligation (§18). It is then manifest
that a nation has an indisputable right to form, maintain, and perfect
its constitution,—to regulate at pleasure every thing relating to the gov-
ernment,—and that no person can have a just right to hinder it. Gov-
ernment is established only for the sake of the nation, with a view to its
safety and happiness.
If any nation is dissatisﬁed with the public administration, it may
apply the necessary remedies, and reform the government. But observe
that I say “the nation”; for I am very far from meaning to authorise a
few malcontents or incendiaries to give disturbance to their governors
by exciting murmurs and seditions. None but the body of a nation have
a right to check those at the helm when they abuse their power. When
the nation is silent and obeys, the people are considered as approving
the conduct of their superiors, or at least ﬁnding it supportable; and it
is not the business of a small number of citizens to put the state in dan-
ger, under the pretence of reforming it.
In virtueof the sameprinciples,itiscertainthatif thenationisuneasy
under its constitution, it has a right to change it.
There can be no difﬁculty in the case, if the whole nation be unan-
imously inclined to make this change. But it is asked, what is to be done
if the people are divided? In the ordinary manage-<11>mentof thestate,
the opinion of the majority must pass without dispute for that of the
whole nation; otherwise it would be almost impossible for the society
ever to take any resolution. It appears then by parity of reasoning, that
a nation may change the constitution of the state by a majority of votes;
and whenever there is nothing in this change that can be considered as
contrary to the act of civil association, or totheintentionof thoseunited
under it, the whole are bound to conform to the resolution of the ma-
jority. But if the question be, to quit a form of government, to which
alone it appeared that the people were willing tosubmitontheirentering
into the bonds of society,—if the greater part of a free people, after the
example of the Jews in the time of Samuel, are weary of liberty, and
§31. The
rights of a
nation with
respect to
its consti-
tution and
government.
§32. It may
reform the
government.
§33. And may
change the
constitution.


chapter iii
95
resolved to submit to the authority of a monarch,—those citizens who
are more jealous of that privilege, so invaluable to those who have tasted
it,—though obliged to suffer the majority to do as they please,—are un-
der no obligation at all to submit to the new government: they may quit
a society which seems to have dissolved itself in order to unite again
under another form: they have a right to retire elsewhere, to sell their
lands, and take with them all their effects.
Here again a very important question presents itself. It essentially be-
longs to the society to make laws both in relation to the manner inwhich
it desires to be governed, and to the conduct of the citizens:—this is
called the legislative power. The nation may intrust the exercise of it to
the prince, or to an assembly; or to that assembly and the prince jointly;
who have then a right to make new laws and to repeal old ones. It is
asked whether their power extends to the fundamental laws,—whether
they may change the constitution of the state? The principles we have
laid down lead us to decide with certainty, that the authority of these
legislators does not extend so far, and that they ought to consider the
fundamental laws as sacred, if the nation has not, in very express terms,
given them power to change them. For the constitution of the state
ought to possess stability: and since that was ﬁrst established by the na-
tion, which afterwards intrusted certain persons with the legislative
power, the fundamental laws are excepted from their commission. It is
visible that the society only intended to make provision for having the
state constantly furnished with laws suited to particular conjunctures,
and, for that purpose, gave the legislature the power of abrogating the
ancient civil and political laws that were not fundamental, and of mak-
ing new ones: but nothing leads us to think that it meant to submit the
constitution itself to their will. In short, it is from the constitution that
those legislators derive their power: howthencantheychangeit,without
destroying the foundation of their own authority? By the fundamental
laws of England, the two houses of parliament, in concert withtheking,
exercise the legislative power: but if the two houses should resolve to
suppress themselves, and to invest the king with full and absolute au-
thority, certainly the nation would <12> not suffer it. And who would
dare to assert that they would not have a right to oppose it? But if the
§34. Of the
legislative
power, and
whether it can
change the
constitution.

96
chapter vii
723
spect, do what he pleases in his own house, into which no body has a
right to pry, or to enter. But if the sovereign of the country where he
resides, should, for substantial reasons, refuse him permissiontopractise
his religion in any manner which might render it an object of public
notice, we must not presume to condemn the conduct of thatsovereign,
much less to accuse him of violating the law of nations. At present em-
bassadors are not debarred the free exercise of their religion in any civ-
ilised country: for a privilege which is founded on reason, cannot be
refused when it is attended with no ill consequence.
Among those rights that are not necessary to the success of embassies,
there are, on the other hand, some which are not founded on a general
consent of nations, but which are nevertheless, by the custom of several
countries, annexed to the embassadorial character. Of thisnumberisthe
exemption of things brought into or sent out of the country by a foreign
minister, from the customary duties on importation and exportation.
There is no necessity that he should be favoured with any distinction in
that respect, since his payment of those duties will not render him the
less capable of discharging his functions. If the sovereign is pleased to
exempt him from them, it is an instance of civility which the minister
could not claim as matter of right, any more than that his baggage, or
any chests or packages which he imports from abroad, shall not be
searched at the custom-house. Thomas Chaloner, the English embas-
sador in Spain, sent home a bitter complaint to queen Elizabeth his mis-
tress, that the custom-house ofﬁcers had opened his trunks in order to
search them. But the queen returned him for answer, that it was “the
duty of an embassador to wink at every thing which did not directly
offend the dignity of his sovereign.”*
The independency of theembassadorexemptshimindeedfromevery
personal imposition, capitation, or other duty of that nature, and in
general from every tax relating to the character of a subject of the state.
But as for duties laid on any kind of goods or provisions, the most ab-
solute independency does not exempt him from the payment of them:
even sovereigns themselves are subject to them. In Holland, the follow-
* Wicquefort’s Embass. book i. §28. towards the end.
§105. Whether
an embassador
be exempted
from all
imposts.


724
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
ing rule is observed:—embassadors are exempt from the taxes on con-
sumption,—doubtless, because those taxes are more directly of a per-
sonal nature: but they pay the duties on importation and exportation.
However extensive their exemption may be, it is manifestthatitsolely
relates to things intended for their own use. Should they abuse andmake
a shameful trafﬁc of it by lending their name to merchants,thesovereign
has unquestionably a right to put a stop to the fraud, evenbysuppressing
the privilege. Such things have been known in several places; and the
sordid avarice of some ministers, who made a trade of their exemption,
has oblig-<485>ed the sovereign to deprive them of it. At present the
foreign ministers at Petersburgh aresubjecttothedutiesonimportation:
but the empress has the generosity to indemnify them for the loss of a
privilege which they had no right to claim, and which, from the fre-
quency of its abuse, she had been obliged to abolish.
But here it is asked, whether a nation may abolish what general cus-
tom has established with respect to foreign ministers? Let us then con-
sider what obligation custom and received usage can impose on nations,
not only in what concerns ministers, but also in any other instance, in
general. The usages and customs of other nations are no farther oblig-
atory on an independent state, than as she has expressly or tacitly given
her consent to them. But when once a custom, indifferent in itself, has
been generally established and received, it carries the force of an obli-
gation on the states which have tacitly or expressly adopted it. Never-
theless, if, in process of time, any nation perceives that such custom is
attended with inconveniences, she is at liberty to declare that she no
longer chuses to conform to it: and when once she has made this explicit
declaration, no cause of complaint lies against her for refusing thence-
forward to observethecustom inquestion.Butsuchadeclarationshould
be made beforehand, and at a time when it does not affect any particular
nation: it is too late to make it when the case actually exists: for it is a
maxim universally received, that a law must never be changed at the
moment of the actual existence of the particular case to which wewould
apply it. Thus, on the subject before us, a sovereign who has previously
notiﬁed his intentions, and received an embassador only onthatfooting,
is not obliged to allow him the enjoyment of all the privileges, or to pay
§106. Obliga-
tion founded
on use and
custom.


chapter vii
725
him all the honours, which custom had before annexed to the embas-
sadorial character,—provided that the privileges and honours which are
with-held be not essential to the nature of the embassy, and necessary
to ensure its legitimate success. To refuse privileges of this latter kind,
would be the same thing in effectasrefusingtheembassyitself,aconduct
which a state is not at liberty to pursue generally and on every occasion
(§65), but in those instances only where the refusal is founded on some
very substantial reason. To with-hold honours which are consecrated by
custom and become in a manner essential, is an expression of contempt,
and an actual injury.
Here it must be further observed, that, when a sovereign intends to
break through an established custom, the rule should be general. To re-
fuse certain customary honours or privileges to the embassador of one
nation, and to continue the enjoyment of them to others, is an affront
to that nation, a mark of contempt, or at least of ill-will.
Sometimes princes send to each other secret ministers, whose char-
acter is not public. If a minister of this kind be insulted by a person
unacquainted with his character, such insult is no violation of the law
of nations: but the prince who receives this embassador, and knows him
to be a public minister, is bound by the <486> same ties of duty towards
him as towards a publicly acknowledged embassador, and under equal
obligation to protect him, and, as far as in his power, to ensure him the
full enjoyment of that inviolability and independence which the law of
nationsannexestotheembassadorialcharacter.Noexcuse,therefore,can
be offered for the conduct of Francis Sforza, duke of Milan,24 inputting
to death Maraviglia, secret minister of Francis the First. Sforzahadoften
treated with that secret agent, and had acknowledged him as the French
monarch’s minister.*
We cannot introduce in any more proper place an importantquestion
of the law of nations, which is nearly allied to the right of embassies. It
is asked, what are the rights of a sovereign who happens tobe inaforeign
* See the Memoirs of Martin Du Bellay, book iv. and Father Daniel’s History of
France, vol. v. p. 300, &c.
24. Francis Sforza, Duke of Milan, r. 1450–66.
§107. A min-
ister whose
character is
not public.
§108. A
sovereign
in a foreign
country.

726
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
country, and how the master of the country is to treat him?If thatprince
be come to negotiate, or to treat about some public affair, he is doubtless
entitled in a more eminent degree to enjoy all the rights of embassadors.
If he be come as a traveller, his dignity alone, and the regard due to the
nation which he represents and governs, shelters him from all insult,
gives him a claim to respect and attention of every kind, and exempts
him from all jurisdiction. On his making himself known, he cannot be
treated as subject to the common laws; for it is not to be presumed that
he has consented to such a subjection: and if a prince will not suffer him
in his dominions on that footing, he should give him notice of his in-
tentions. But if the foreign prince forms any plot against the safety and
welfare of the state,—in a word, if he acts as an enemy,—he may very
justly be treated as such. In every other case he is entitled to full security,
since even a private individual of a foreign nation has a right toexpect it.
A ridiculous notion has possessed the minds even of persons who
deem themselves superior in understanding to the common herd of
mankind. They think thata sovereignwhoentersaforeigncountrywith-
out permission, may be arrested there.* But on what reason can such an
act of violence be grounded? The absurdity of the doctrine carries its
own refutation on the face of it. A foreign sovereign, it is true, ought to
give notice of his coming, if he wishes to receive such treatment as he
is entitled to expect. It would moreover be prudent in him to make ap-
plicationforpassports,inorderthatdesigningmalevolencemaynothave
any pretext, any hope of ﬁnding specious reasons to pal-<487>liate an
act of injustice and violence. I further allow, that,—as the presence of
a foreign sovereign may on certain occasions be productive of serious
* It is surprising to see a grave historian give into this opinion. See Gramond’s
Hist. Gall. lib. xii. The cardinal De Richelieu also alleged this triﬂing reason, when
he gave orders for arresting Charles Lewis, the elector Palatine, who had attempted
to pass through France incognito: he said, that “No foreign prince was permitted to
pass through the kingdom without a passport.” But he added better reasons, drawn
from the prince Palatine’s designs against Brissac and the other places left by Bernard
duke of Saxe-Weymar, and to which France pretended to have a greater right than
any other power, because those conquests had been made with the money furnished
by that kingdom. See the History of the Treaty of Westphalia, by Father Bougant
[[Bougeant]], vol. ii. in 12mo. pag. 88.
chapter vii
727
consequences,—if the times are in any-wise critical, and the motives of
his journey liable to suspicion, he ought not to undertake it without the
consent and approbation of the prince whose territories he means to
enter. When Peter the Great determined personallytovisitforeigncoun-
tries in quest of the arts and sciences to enrich his empire, he travelled
in the retinue of his own embassadors.
A foreign prince unquestionably retains all his rights over his own
state and subjects, and may exercise them in every instance that does not
affect the sovereignty of the country in which he is a sojourner. Theking
of France, therefore, appears to have been too punctilious in refusing to
permit the emperor Sigismund, when at Lyons, to confer the dignity of
duke on the count of Savoy, who was a vassal of the empire (seeBook II.
§40). Less difﬁculty would have been made with any other prince: but
the court was scrupulously careful to guard against the old claims of the
emperors. On the other hand, it was with very good reason thatthesame
court expressed considerable displeasure at the conduct of queen Chris-
tina,25 who, whilst residing in France, caused one of her domestics to be
executed in her own house: for an execution of that kind is an act of
territorial jurisdiction: and besides, Christinahadabdicatedthecrown.26
Her reservations, her birth, her dignity, might indeed entitle her to great
honours, or, at most, to an entire independence,—but not to all the
rights of an actual sovereign. The famous instance of Mary queen of
Scots, so often quoted in questions on this subject, is not a very apposite
example: for that princess was no longer in possession of the crown at
the time when she came to England, and was arrested, tried, and con-
demned to death.
The deputies sent to the assembly of the states of a kingdom or a
republic, are not public ministers like those of whom we have spoken
above, as they are not sent to foreign powers: but they arepublicpersons,
and in that character are possessed of privileges which it is our duty to
establish before we take leave of this subject. The states which have a
right to meet by deputies for the purpose of deliberating on public af-
25. Queen Christina of Sweden, r. 1632–54.
26. In 1654.
§109. Depu-
ties to the
states.


728
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
fairs, are, from that very circumstance, entitled to demand perfect se-
curity for their representatives, together with every exemption and im-
munity that is necessary to the free discharge of their functions. If the
persons of the deputies be not inviolable, their constituents cannot be
assured of their ﬁdelity in asserting the rights of the nation, and cou-
rageously defending the public interests. And how could those repre-
sentatives duly acquit themselves of their functions, if people were al-
lowed to molest them by arrests, either for debt or for ordinary offences?
Between the nation and the sovereign, in this case, the same reasonshold
good, on which, between state and state, the immunities of embassadors
are founded. We may therefore safely venture to assert that the rights of
the nation, and the public faith, secure those deputies from violence of
every kind, and even from <488> any judicial prosecution, during the
term of their ministry. Such indeed is the rule observed in all countries,
and particularly at the diets of the empire, the parliaments of England,
and the cortes of Spain. Henry the Third of France27 caused the duke
and the cardinal de Guise to be killed at the meeting of the states at
Blois.28 Unquestionably the security of the assembly wasviolatedbythat
action: but those two princes werefactiousrebels,whoseaudaciousviews
aimed at nothing less than depriving their sovereign of his crown. And
if it was equally certain that Henry was no longer possessed of sufﬁcient
power to bring them to a formal trial, and punish them according to the
laws,thenecessityof justiﬁableself-defencegavethekingarighttoadopt
the mode which he pursued, and furnishes a sufﬁcient apology for his
conduct. It is the misfortune of weak and unskilful princes, that they
suffer themselves to be reduced to extremities, from which they cannot
extricate themselves without a violation of every established rule. It is
said that Pope Sixtus the Fifth, on hearing of the catastropheof theduke
de Guise, commended that resolute act, as a necessary stroke of policy:
but when he was told that the cardinal had likewise been killed, he burst
into a violent paroxysm of rage.* This, indeed, was carrying his haughty
* See the French historians [[Daniel, Me´zeray, Velly]].
27. Henry III, r. 1574–89.
28. In 1588 the French Estates General met at Blois.


chapter viii
729
pretensions to an excessive height. The pontiff readily allowed that ur-
gent necessity had authorised Henry to violate the security of the states,
and to break through all the forms of justice: and could he pretend that
this prince, rather than be deﬁcient in respect for the Roman purple,
should risk both his crown and his life?
chapter viii
Of the Judge of Embassadors in Civil Cases.
Some authors will have an embassador to be subject, in civil cases, to the
jurisdiction of the country where he resides,—at least in such cases as
have arisen during the time of his embassy; and, in support of their
opinion, they allege that this subjection is by no means derogatory to
the embassadorial character: “for,” say they, “however sacred a person
may be, his inviolability is not affected by suing him in a civil action.”
But it is not on account of the sacredness of their person that embas-
sadors cannot be sued: it is because they are independent of the juris-
diction of the country to which they are sent; and the substantialreasons
on which that independency is grounded, may be seen in a preceding
part of this work (§92). Let us here add that it is in every respect highly
proper, and even necessary, that an embassador should be exempt from
judicial prosecution even in civil causes, in order that he may be free
from molestation in the exercise of his functions. For a similar reason,
it was not allowed among the Romans to summon a priest whilst he
<489> was employed in his sacred ofﬁces:* but at other times he was
open to the law. The reason which we have here alleged for the exemp-
tion, is also assigned in the Roman law: “Ideo enim non datur actio (ad-
versus legatum) ne ab ofﬁcio suscepto legationis avocetur,† ne impediatur
* Nec pontiﬁcem (in jus vocari oportet) dum sacra facit. [[“One should not bring
a priest before the law while he is performing religious rites” (trans. Eds.).]][[Justin-
ian’s]] Digest. lib. ii. tit. 4, De in Jus vocando, leg. 2.
† [[Justinian’s]] Digest. lib. v. tit. 1, De Judiciis, &c. leg. 24, §2.
§110. The
embassador is
exempt from
the civil juris-
diction of the
country where
he resides.


730
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
legatio.*29 But there was an exception as to those transactions which had
taken place during the embassy. This was reasonable with regardtothose
legati or ministers of whom the Roman law here speaks, who, beingsent
only by nations subject to the empire, could not lay claim to the inde-
pendency enjoyed by a foreign minister. As they were subjects of the
state, the legislature was at liberty to establish whatever regulations it
thought most proper respecting them: but a sovereign has not the like
power of obliging the minister of another sovereign to submit to his
jurisdiction: and even if such power was vested in him by convention
or otherwise, the exercise of it would be highlyimproper:because,under
that pretext, the embassador might be often molested in his ministry,
and the state involved in very disagreeable quarrels, for the triﬂing con-
cerns of some private individuals, who might and ought to have taken
better precautions for their own security. It is, therefore, only in con-
formity to the mutual duties which states owe to each other, and in ac-
cord with the grand principles of the law of nations, that an embassador
or public minister is at present, by the universal custom and consent of
nations, independent of all jurisdiction in the country where he resides,
either in civil or criminal cases. I know there have occurred some in-
stances to the contrary: but a few facts do not establish a custom: on the
contrary, those to which I allude, only contribute, by the censure passed
on them, to prove the custom such as I have asserted it to be. In the year
1668, the Portuguese resident at the Haguewas, byanorderof thecourt
of justice, arrested and imprisoned for debt. But an illustrious mem-
ber of that same court† very justly thinks that the procedure was un-
justiﬁable, and contrary to the law of nations. In the year 1657, a res-
ident of the elector of Brandenburg was also arrested for debt in
England. But he was set at liberty, as having been illegally arrested; and
* Ibid. leg. xxvi.
† M. de Bynkershoek’s Competent Judge of Embassadors, chap. xiii. §1.
29. “Now for that reason a lawsuit is not granted (against an ambassador) in case
he is called away from the diplomatic post he has taken up, and lest diplomacy be
hampered.”


chapter viii
731
even the creditors and ofﬁcersof justicewhohadofferedhimthatinsult
were punished.*
But if an embassador chooses to renounce a partof hisindependency,
and to subject himself in civil affairs to the jurisdiction of the country,
he is undoubtedly at liberty to do so, provided it be done with his
master’s consent. Without such consent, the embassador has no right to
renounce privileges in which the dig-<490>nity and service of his sov-
ereign are concerned,—which are founded on the master’s rights, and
institutedforhisadvantage,notforthatof theminister.Itistrue,indeed,
that the embassador, without waiting for his sovereign’s permission, ac-
knowledges the jurisdiction of the country when he commences a suit
as plaintiff in a court of justice. But the consequence, in that case, is
inevitable; and besides, in a civil cause, on a point of private interest, no
inconvenience attends it; since the embassador has it at all times in his
power to avoid commencing a suit, or may, if such a step be necessary,
intrust the prosecution of his cause to an attorney or lawyer.
Let us here add, by the way, that an embassador ought never to in-
stitute a prosecution on a criminal charge. If he has been insulted, he
should make his complaint to the sovereign; and the delinquent is to be
prosecuted by the public.
It may happen that the minister of a foreign power is at the sametime
a subject of the state where he is employed; and in this case, as a subject,
he is unquestionably under the jurisdiction of the country ineverything
which does not directly relate to his ministry. But the question is, to
determine in what cases those two characters, of subject and foreign
minister, are united in the same person. To produce such union, it is not
sufﬁcient that the minister was born a subject of the state to which he
is sent; for, unless the laws expressly prohibit every citizen to leave his
country, he may legally have renounced his country, and placed himself
* Ibid.—It is not long since the world witnessed the circumstance of a foreign
minister in France being pursued by his creditors, and refused a passport by the
French court. See Journal Politique de Bouillon, Feb. 1, 1771, page 54, and Jan. 15,
p. 57. [[Journal politique (March 1766–95),later calledGazettedesGazettes, published
at Bouillon. Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§111. How he
may volun-
tarily subject
himself to it.
§112. A
minister who
is a subject
of the state
where he is
employed.

732
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
in subjection to a new master. He may likewise, without renouncing his
country for ever, become independent of it during the whole time that
he spends in the service of a foreign prince; and the presumption is cer-
tainly in favour of such independency: for the state and functions of a
public minister naturally require that he should depend only on hismas-
ter (§92), on the prince who has intrusted him with the management of
his affairs. Whenever, therefore, there does not exist any circumstance
which furnishes a proof or indication to the contrary, a foreignminister,
though antecedently a subject of the state, is reputed to be absolutely
independent of it during the whole time of his commission. If his for-
mer sovereign does not choose to allow him such independency in his
dominions, he may refuse to admit him in the character of a foreign
minister, as is the practice in France, where, according to monsieur De
Callieres, “the king no longer receives any of his own subjects as min-
isters of foreign princes.”*
But a subject of the state may still continue its subject,notwithstand-
ing his acceptance of a commission from aforeignprince.Hissubjection
is expressly established whenthesovereignacknowledgeshimasminister
only with a reserve that he shall remain a subject of the state. The states-
general of the United Provinces, in a decree of the 19th of June 1681,
declare, “That no subject <491> of the state shall be received as embas-
sador or minister of another power, but on condition that he shall not
divesthimself of hischaracterof subject,evenwithregardtojurisdiction
both in civil and criminal affairs,—and that whoever, in makinghimself
known as embassador or minister, has not mentioned his quality of sub-
ject of the state, shall not enjoy thoserightsorprivilegeswhichpeculiarly
belong to the ministers of foreign powers.”†
Such a minister may likewise retain his former subjection tacitly; and
then, by a natural consequence drawn from his actions, state, and whole
behaviour, it is known that he continues a subject. Thus, independent
of the declaration abovementioned, those Dutch merchants whoobtain
the title of residentsof certainforeignprinces,andneverthelesscontinue
* [[Callie`res]] Manner of negotiating with Sovereigns, chap. vi.
† Bynkershock, ubi supra, chap. xi.
chapter viii
733
to carry on their commerce, thereby sufﬁciently denote that theyremain
subjects. Whatever inconveniences may attend the subjection of a min-
ister to the sovereign with whom he resides, if the foreign princechooses
to acquiesce in such a state of things, and is content to have a minister
on that footing, it is his own concern; and should his minister on any
ignominious occasion be treated as a subject, he has no cause of
complaint.
It may likewise happen that a foreign minister shall become a subject
of the sovereign to whom he is sent, by accepting of a post under him:
and in this case he cannot lay claim to independence except in such
things alone as directly relate to his ministry. The prince by whom he is
delegated, in allowing of this voluntary subjection, agrees to risk the
inconveniences that attend it. Thus, in the last century, the baron De
Charnace´30 and the count D’Estrades31 were embassadors from France
to the states-general, and at the same times ofﬁcers in their high might-
inesses’ army.
The independency of a public minister is the true reason of his ex-
emption from the jurisdiction of the country in which he resides. No
legal process can be directly issued against him, because he is not subject
to the authority of the prince or the magistrates. But it is asked whether
thatexemptionof hispersonextendsindiscriminatelytoallhisproperty?
In order to solve this question, we must consider by what circumstances
property may be subjected to, and by what others it may be exempted
from, the jurisdiction of a country. In general, whatever lies within the
extent of a country, is subject to the authority and jurisdiction of the
sovereign (Book I. §205, and Book II. §§83, 84). If any dispute arises
concerning effects or goods within or passing through the country, it is
to be decided by the judge of the place. In virtue of this dependence,
the mode of stoppage or seizure has been established in many countries,
for the purpose of compelling a foreigner to repair to the spot where the
seizure has been made, and there to answer questions that are to be put
to him, though not directly relating to the effects seized. But a foreign
30. Baron De Charnace´, r. 1639–40.
31. Count D’Estrades, r. 1640–48.
§113. Immu-
nity of the
minister ex-
tends to his
property.


734
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
minister, <492> as we have already shewn, is independent of the juris-
diction of the country: and his personal independence in civil cases
would be of little avail, unless it extended to every thing which he ﬁnds
necessary in order to enable him to live with dignity, and quietly to at-
tend to the discharge of his functions. Besides, whatever he has brought
with him or purchased for his own use as minister, is so connected with
his person as to partake of the same fate with it. Since the minister en-
tered the territory on the footing of independence, he could not have it
in contemplation to subject his retinue, his baggage, or his necessaries,
to the jurisdiction of the country. Every thing, therefore, which directly
belongs to his person in the character of a public minister,—everything
which is intended for his use, or which serves for his own maintenance
and that of his household,—every thing of that kind, I say, partakes of
the minister’s independency, and is absolutely exempt from all jurisdic-
tion in the country. Those things, together with the person to whom
they belong, are considered as being out of the country.
But this exemption cannot extend to such property as evidently be-
longs to the embassador under any other relation than that of minister.
What has no afﬁnity with his functions and character, cannot partake
of the privileges which are solely derived from his functions and char-
acter. Should a minister, therefore, (as it has often been the case) embark
in any branch of commerce, all the effects, goods, money, and debts,
active and passive, which are connected with his mercantileconcerns,—
and likewise all contests and law-suits to which they may give rise,—fall
under the jurisdiction of the country. And although, in consequence of
the minister’s independency, no legal process can, in those law-suits, be
directly issued against his person, he is nevertheless, by the seizure of the
effects belonging to his commerce, indirectly compelled to plead in his
own defence. The abuses which would arise from a contrary practice,
are evident. What could beexpectedfromamerchantvestedwithaprivi-
lege to commit every kind of injustice in a foreign country? There exists
not a shadow of reason for extending the ministerial immunity tothings
of that nature. If the sovereign who sends a minister is apprehensive of
any inconvenience from the indirect dependency in which his servant
thus becomes involved, he has only to lay on him his injunctionsagainst
§114. The
exemption
cannot extend
to effects
belonging to
any trade the
minister may
carry on;


chapter viii
735
engaging in commerce,—an occupation, indeed, which ill accords with
the dignity of the ministerial character.
To what we have said, let us add two illustrations: 1. In doubtfulcases,
the respect due to the ministerial character requires that things should
always be explained to the advantage of that character. I mean thatwhen
there is room for doubt whether a thing be really intended for the use
of the minister and his household, or whether it belongs to his com-
merce, the decision must be given in favour of the minister; otherwise
there would be a risk of violating his privileges. 2. When I say that we
may <493> seize such of the minister’s effects as have no relation to his
public character, particularly those that belong to his commercial con-
cerns, this is to be understood only on the supposition that the seizure
be not made for any cause arising from his transactions in quality of
minister, as for instance, articles supplied for the useof hisfamily,house-
rent, &c. because any claims which may lie against him in that relation,
cannot be decided in the country, and consequently cannot be subjected
to its jurisdiction by the indirect mode of seizure.
All landed estates, all immovable property, by whomsoeverpossessed,
are subject to the jurisdiction of the country (Book I. §205, and Book II.
§§83, 84). Are they to be exempted from it on the single groundthattheir
owner has been appointed embassador by a foreign power? There can
exist no reason for the exemption in such case. It is not in his public
character that the embassador possesses that property; nor is it attached
to his person, so as, like himself, to be reputed out of the territory. If
the foreign prince apprehends any ill consequences from that state of
dependency in which his minister may stand on account of some of his
possessions, he may make choice of another person to ﬁll the ofﬁce. Let
us conclude, therefore, that immovable property possessed by a foreign
minister does not change its nature in consequence of the charactercon-
ferred on the owner, but continues subject to the jurisdiction of thestate
in which it lies. All contests and law-suits concerning that property are
to be carried before the tribunals of the country; and those same tri-
bunals may decree its seizure in order to satisfy any legal claim. It is,
however, easily conceived, that, if the embassador lives in a house of his
own, that house is excepted from the rule, as actually serving for his
§115. nor to
immovable
property
which he
possesses in
the country.


736
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
immediate use;—it is excepted, I mean, in whatever may affect the pres-
ent use which the embassador makes of it.
It may be seen, in monsieur de Bynkershoek’s treatise,* that custom
coincides with the principles laid down in this and the preceding sec-
tions. In suing an embassador in either of the two cases just men-
tioned,—that is to say, on the subject of any immovable property lying
in the country, or of movable effects which have no connection withthe
embassy,—the embassador is to be summoned in the same manner as
an absent person, since he is reputed to be out of the country, and his
independency does not permit any immediate address to his person in
an authoritative manner, such as sending an ofﬁcer of a court of justice
to him.
By what mode, then, may satisfaction be obtained of an embassador
who refuses to do justice to those who have dealings with him? It is as-
serted by many that he must be sued before the tribunal to whose juris-
diction he was subject antecedently to his appointment as embassador.
In this there appears to me an impropriety. If the necessity and impor-
tance of his functions set him above all prosecution in the foreign coun-
try where he resides, shall any man be allowed to molest him in the per-
formance of his ministerial duties by summoning him to appear
be-<494>fore the tribunals of his own country? The interest of thepub-
lic service forbids such a procedure. It is absolutely necessary that the
minister should solely depend on his sovereign, to whom he belongs in
a peculiar manner. He is an instrument in the hand of the conductor of
the nation; and no circumstance whatever ought to be permitted to di-
vert or obstruct his services. Neither would it be just that the absence of
a person who is intrusted with the interests of the sovereign and the
nation, should prove detrimental to him in his private concerns. In all
countries, thosewhoareabsentontheserviceof thestateenjoyprivileges
which secure them from the inconveniences attendant on the state of
absentees. But these privileges of the ministers of the state should, as far
as possible, be so modelled and tempered, as not to be unreasonably
burthensome or injurious to private persons who have dealings with
* On the Competent Judge of Embassadors, chap. xvi. §6.
§116. How
justice may
be obtained
against an
embassador.


chapter ix
737
them. How then are those different interests—the service of the state
and the administration of justice—to be reconciled? All privatepersons,
whether citizens or foreigners, who have any demands against a minis-
ter—if they cannot obtain satisfaction from himself—should apply to
his master, who is obliged to do them justice in such manner as may be
most consistent with the public service. It rests with the prince to de-
termine whether it be most proper to recall his minister, to appoint a
tribunal before which he may be sued, or to order an adjournment of
the cause, &c. In a word, the good of the state does not allow that any
person whatever should have it in his power to disturb the minister in
his functions, or to divert his attention from them, without the sover-
eign’s permission; and the sovereign, whose duty it is to distribute im-
partial and universal justice, ought not to countenance his minister in
refusing it, or wearying out his adversaries by unjust delays.
chapter ix
Of the Embassador’s House and Domestics.
The independency of the embassador would be very imperfect, and his
security very precarious, if the house in which he lives were not to enjoy
a perfect immunity, and to be inaccessible to the ordinary ofﬁcers of
justice. The embassador might be molested under a thousand pretexts;
his secrets might be discovered by searching his papers, and his person
exposed to insults. Thus all the reasons which establishhisindependence
and inviolability, concur likewise in securing the freedom of his house.
In all civilised nations, this right is acknowledged as annexed to the em-
bassadorial character: and an embassador’s house, at least in all the or-
dinary affairs of life, is, equally with his person, considered as being out
of the country. Of this, a remarkable instance occurred, not many years
ago, at Petersburg. On the third of April, 1752, thirty soldiers, with an
ofﬁcer at <495> their head, entered the house of baron Greiffenheim
the Swedish minister, and carried off two of his domestics, whom they
conducted to prison, under a pretence that those two men had clandes-
§117. The
embassador’s
house.

738
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
tinely sold liquors which the imperial farm alone has the privilege of
selling. The court, incensed at such a proceeding, caused the authors of
this act of violence to be immediately taken into custody, and the em-
press ordered satisfaction to be made to the offended minister; she like-
wise sent to him and to all the other foreign ministers, a declaration, in
which she expressed her concern and resentment at what had happened,
and communicated the orders which she had given to the senate to in-
stitute a prosecution against the commissioner of the ofﬁce established
for the prevention of the clandestine sale of liquors,—he beingthechief
delinquent.
The house of an embassador ought to be safe from all outrage, being
under the particular protection of the law of nations, and that of the
country: to insult it, is a crime both against the state and against all other
nations.
But the immunity and freedom of the embassador’s house is estab-
lished only in favour of the minister and his household; as is evident
from the very reasons upon which it is grounded. Can he take advantage
of the privilege, in order to convert his house into an asylum, to afford
shelter and protection to the enemies of the prince, and to malefactors
of every kind, and thus screen them from the punishments which they
have deserved? Such proceedings would be contrary to all the duties of
an embassador, to the spirit by which he ought to be animated, and to
the lawful purposes for which he has been admitted into the country.
This is what nobody will presume to deny. But I proceed farther, and
lay it down as a certain truth, that a sovereign is not obliged to tolerate
an abuse so pernicious to his state, and so detrimental to society. I grant,
indeed, that when there is question only of certain ordinary transgres-
sions, and these committed by persons who often prove to be rather
unfortunate than criminal, or whose punishment is of no great impor-
tance to the peace of society, the house of an embassador may well serve
as an asylum for such offenders; and it is better that the sovereignshould
suffer them to escape, than expose the embassador to frequent moles-
tation under pretence of a search after them, and thus involve the state
in any difﬁculties which might arise from such proceedings. And as the
house of an embassador is independent of the ordinary jurisdiction, no
§118. Right
of asylum.
chapter ix
739
magistrate, justice of the peace, or other subordinate ofﬁcer, is in any
case entitled to enter it by his own authority, or to send any of his people
to enter it, unless on occasions of urgent necessity, when the public wel-
fare is threatened with imminent danger which admits of no delay.
Whatever concerns a point of such weight and delicacy,—whatever af-
fects the rights and the dignity of a foreign power,—whatever may em-
broil the state with that power,—is to be laid immediately before the
sovereign, and to be determined either by himself in person, or, under
his direction, by the privy council. <496> Thus, it belongs to the sov-
ereign to decide, on occasion, how far the right of asylum, which an
embassador claims as belonging to his house, is to be respected: and if
the question relates to an offender whose arrest or punishmentisof great
importance to the state, the prince is not to be with-held by the consid-
eration of a privilege which was never granted for the detriment and
ruin of states. In the year 1726, the famous duke de Ripperda having
sheltered himself in the house of lord Harrington, embassador from
England, the council of Castille decided “that he might be taken out of
it, even by force; since, otherwise, those regulations which had been
made for the purpose of maintaining a more regular and intimate cor-
respondence between sovereigns, would on the contrary operate to the
subversion and utter ruin of their authority;—and that, if persons who
had been intrusted with the ﬁnances, the power, and the secrets of the
state, were, when guilty of violating the duties of their ofﬁce, allowed
to take shelter under a privilege which had been granted to the houses
of embassadors in favour only of ordinary offenders,—such an exten-
sion of the right of asylum would be productive of consequences the
most pernicious and detrimental to all the powers on earth, who, if the
practice once became established, would be reduced to the necessity,not
only of enduring the presence of every man who was plotting their de-
struction, but even of seeing him supported in their own court.”*—
Nothing could be said on this head with greater truth and judgment.
The abuse of the privilege has no-where been carried to a greater ex-
tent than at Rome, where the embassadors of crowned heads claim it
* Memoirs of the abbe´ Du Montgon, vol. i.


740
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
for the whole ward in which their house is situated. The popes, once so
formidable to sovereigns, have for above two centuries been in theirturn
under a necessity of observing the most delicate and cautious circum-
spection in their conduct towards them. It is in vain that they have en-
deavoured to suppress, or at least to reduce within proper bounds, an
abusive privilege, for which, prescription, however great its antiquity,
ought not to be allowed as a sufﬁcient plea in opposition to justice and
reason.
An embassador’s carriages and equipages are equally privileged with
his house, and for the same reasons: to insult them, is an attack on the
embassador himself, and on the sovereign whom he represents. Theyare
independent of all subordinate authority—of guards, custom-houseof-
ﬁcers, magistrates and their agents,—and must not be stopped or
searched without a superior order. But in this instance, as in that of the
embassador’s house, the abuse is not to be confounded with the right.
It would be absurd that a foreign minister should have the power of
conveying off in his coach a criminal of consequence,—a man, in the
seizure of whose person the state were highly interested; and that he
should do this under the very eyes of the sovereign, who thus would see
himself deﬁed in his own kingdom and court. Where <497> is the sov-
ereign who would suffer this? The marquis De Fontenay, the French
embassador at Rome, sheltered the Neapolitan exiles and rebels, and at
last undertook to convey them out of Rome in his own carriages: but
the carriages were stopped at the city gates by some Corsicans of the
pope’s guard, and the Neapolitans committed to prison. The embassa-
dor warmly complained of the procedure: but the pope answered “that
his motive had only been that of arresting men whom the embassador
had assisted in escaping from conﬁnement; and that, since the embas-
sador took the liberty of harbouring villains, and affording protection
to every criminal in the papal territory,—at least he, who was sovereign
of the state, ought to be allowed to have them retaken wherever they
could be found; as the rights and privileges of embassadors were not to
be carried to such lengths.” The embassador replied, “that it would not
appear, on examination, that he had granted an asylum to any subjects
of the pope, but solely to some Neapolitans, whom he might very law-
§119. Exemp-
tion of an
embassador’s
carriages;


chapter ix
741
fully shelter from the persecutions of the Spaniards.”* By this answer,
the minister tacitly conceded that he would not have been authorised to
complain of the stoppage of his carriages, if he had employed them for
the purpose of favouring the escape of any of the pope’s subjects, and
aiding criminals to elude the pursuit of justice.
The persons in an embassador’s retinue partake of his inviolability;
his independency extends to every individual of his household: so in-
timate a connection exists between him and all those persons, that they
share the same fate with him; they immediately depend on him alone,
and are exempt from the jurisdiction of the country, into which they
would not have come without such reservation in their favour. The em-
bassador is bound to protect them; and no insult can be offered to them,
which is not at the same time an insult to himself. If the domestics and
household of a foreign minister were not solely dependent on him, it is
evident at ﬁrst sight, how easily he might be harassed, molested, and
disturbed in the exercise of his functions. These maxims are at present
every-where adopted and conﬁrmed by custom.
The embassador’s wife is intimately united with him, and more par-
ticularly belongs to him than any other person of his household. Ac-
cordingly she participates in hisindependenceandinviolability:sheeven
receives distinguished honours, which, in a certain degree, cannot be
refused to her without affronting the embassador; and for which there
exists, in the generality of courts, an established ceremonial. Therespect
due to the embassador extends likewise to his children, who also partake
of his immunities.
The embassador’s secretary is one of his domestics: but the secretary
of the embassy holds his commission from the sovereign himself; which
makes him a kind of public minister, enjoying in his own right the pro-
tection of the law of nations, and the <498> immunities annexed to his
ofﬁce, independently of the embassador, to whose orders he is indeed
but imperfectly subjected,—sometimes not at all, and always in such
degree only, as their common master has been pleased to ordain.
* Wicquefort’s Embassad. book i. §28, towards the end.
§120. of his
retinue;
§121. of his
wife and
family;
§122. of the
secretary of
the embassy;


742
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
Couriers sent or received by an embassador, his papers, letters, and
dispatches, all essentially belong to the embassy, and are consequently
to be held sacred; since, if they were not respected, the legitimateobjects
of the embassy could not be attained, nor would the embassador be able
to discharge his functions with the necessary degree of security. The
states-general of the United Provinces decided, whilst the president
Jeannin resided with them as embassador from France, that to open the
letters of a public minister is a breach of the law of nations.* Other
instances may be seen in Wicquefort. That privilege, however, does
not—on certain momentous occasions when the embassador himself
has violated the law of nations by forming or countenancing plots or
conspiracies against the state—deprive us of the liberty to seize his pa-
pers for the purpose of discovering the whole secret, and detecting his
accomplices; since, in such an emergency, the embassador himself may
lawfully be arrested and interrogated (§99). An example is furnished us
in the conduct of the Roman government, who seized the letters which
a treasonable junto had committed to the hands of Tarquin’s embas-
sadors (§98).
The persons in a foreign minister’s retinue being independent of the
jurisdiction of the country, cannot be taken into custody or punished
without his consent. It would nevertheless be highly improper that they
should enjoy an absolute independence, and be at liberty to indulge in
every kind of licentious disorder, without control or apprehension.The
embassador must necessarily be supposed to possess whatever degree of
authority is requisite for keeping them in order:† and some writers will
* Wicquefort, book i. §27.
† It is his duty to watch over their conduct, and to exert his authority in order to
prevent them from transgressing the bounds of their station, and committingactions
which may give just offence to the sovereign at whose court he resides,—an event
which may sometimes be productive of very serious and disagreeable consequences.
The French court having sent the count De Harcourt to England to mediate an ac-
commodation between Charles I. and his parliament, several gentlemen of that min-
ister’s suite repaired to the royal army, and fought against the parliamentarians: on
which account the parliament immediately declined all further negotiation with the
count De Harcourt. Du Port’s Hist. of Conspir. vol. iv. p. 261. [[Note added in 1773/
1797 editions.]]
§123. of the
embassador’s
couriers and
dispatches.
§124. The
embassador’s
authority over
his retinue.


chapter ix
743
have that authority to include even a power over life and death. When
the marquis De Roˆny, afterwards duke De Sully, was in England as em-
bassador extraordinary from France, a gentleman of his retinue com-
mitted a murder, which caused a great noise among the people of Lon-
don. The embassador assembled some French noblemen who had
accompanied him on his mission, tried the murderer, andsentencedhim
to lose his head. He then acquainted the lord mayor of London that he
had pronounced sentence on the criminal, desiring that magistrate to
furnish him with an executioner and proper attendants to have <499>
the punishment inﬂicted. But he afterwards consented to deliver up the
criminal to the English, in order that they might execute justice on him
as they thought proper: and Monsieur De Beaumont, the French em-
bassador in ordinary, prevailed on the British monarch to pardon the
young man, who was related to that minister by the ties of consanguin-
ity.* It rests entirely at the option of the sovereign to invest his embas-
sador with such an extensive power over the persons of his suite: and
the marquis De Roˆny was conﬁdently certain of having his conduct ap-
proved by his master, who did, in fact, express his approbation of the
whole transaction. In general, however, it is to be presumed that the
embassador is possessed only of a coercive power sufﬁcient to restrain
his dependents by other punishments which are not of a capital or in-
famous nature. He may punish the faults committedagainsthimself and
against his master’s service, or send the delinquents to their sovereign,
in order to their being punished. But should any of his people commit
crimes against society which deserve a severe punishment, the embas-
sador ought to make a distinction between such of his domestics as be-
long to his own nation, and others who are subjectsof thecountrywhere
he resides. The shortest and most natural way with the latter is todismiss
them from his service, and deliver them up to justice. As to those of his
own nation, if they have offended the sovereign of the country, or com-
mitted any of those atrocious crimes in whose punishment all nations
are interested, and whose perpetrators are, for that reason, usually sur-
rendered by one state when demanded by another,—why should he not
* Sully’s Memoirs, vol. vi. chap. i.

744
book iv: restoration of peace; embassies
give them up to the nation which calls for theirpunishment?If thetrans-
gression be of a different kind, he is to send them to his sovereign. Fi-
nally, if the case be of a doubtful nature, it is the embassador’s duty to
keep the offender in irons till he receives orders from his court. But if
he passes a capital sentence on the criminal, I do not think he can have
it executed in his own house; an execution of that nature being an act
of territorial superiority which belongs only to the sovereign of the
country. And although the embassador, together with his house and
household, be reputed out of the country, that is nothing more than a
ﬁgurative mode of speech intended to express his independency, and all
the rights necessary to the lawful success of the embassy: nor can that
ﬁction involve privileges which are reserved to the sovereign alone,—
which are of too delicate and important a nature to be communicated
to a foreigner, and, moreover, not necessary to the embassador for the
duedischargeof hisfunctions.If theoffencehasbeencommittedagainst
the embassador or against the service of his master, the embassador may
send the delinquent to his sovereign. If the crime concerns the state
where the minister resides, he may try the criminal, and, if he ﬁnds him
worthy of death, deliver him up to the justice of the country, as did the
marquis De Roˆny. <500>
When the commission of an embassador is at an end,—when he has
concluded the business for which he came into the country,—when he
is recalled or dismissed,—in a word, when he is obliged to depart on any
account whatever, his functions cease: but his privileges and rights do
not immediately expire: he retains them till his return to his sovereign,
to whom he is to make a report of his embassy.* His safety, his inde-
pendence, and his inviolability, are not less necessary to the success of
the embassy in his return, than at his coming. Accordingly, when an
embassador departs on account of a war arising between his master and
the sovereign at whose court he was employed, he is allowed a sufﬁcient
* “It was, at that time,” says Joinville, “an established custom, as well in pagan as
in christian countries, that, when two princes were at war, if one of them happened
to die, the embassadors whom they had mutually sent to each other, remained pris-
oners and slaves.” p. 72. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§125. When
the rights of
an embassador
expire.
chapter ix
745
time to quit the country in perfect security: and moreover, if he was
returning home by sea, and happened to be taken on his passage, he
would be released without a moment’s hesitation, as not being subject
to lawful capture.
For the same reasons the embassador’s privileges still exist at those
times when the activity of his ministry happens to be suspended, and
he stands in need of fresh powers. Such a case occurs in consequence of
the death of the prince whom theministerrepresents,orof thesovereign
at whose court he resides. On either occasion it becomes necessary that
the minister should be furnished with new credentials. The necessity,
however, is less cogent in the latter than in the former case, especially if
the successor of the deceased prince be the natural and necessary suc-
cessor; because, while the authority whence the minister’s power ema-
nated, still subsists, it is fairly presumable that he retains his formerchar-
acter at the court of the new sovereign. But if his own master is nomore,
the minister’s powers are at an end; and he must necessarily receive fresh
credentials from the new prince, before he can be authorised to speak
and act in his name. In the interim, however, he still continues to be the
minister of his nation, and, as such, is entitled to enjoy all the rights and
honours annexed to that character.
At length I have reached the end of my proposed career. I do not
ﬂatter myself with the idea of having given a perfect, full, and complete
treatise of the law of nations; nor was that, indeed, my design; for it
would have been too great a degree of conﬁdence in my own abilities to
have made such an attempt on a subject so extensive and so copious. I
shall think I have done a great deal, if my principles are approved as
solid, luminous, and sufﬁcient to enable intelligent persons to give a
proper solution of any minute questions that may arise in particular
cases; and shall be happy if the result of my labours proves in any wise
serviceable to those men in power who love mankind and respect jus-
tice,—and furnishes them with weapons for the purpose of defending
the cause of right, and compelling the unjust to observe at least some
measures, and to keep within the bounds of decency.
E N D.
§126. Cases
when new
credentials are
necessary.
§127.
Conclusion.

747
Essay on the Foundation of Natural Law and on
the First Principle of the Obligation Men Find
Themselves Under to Observe Laws
1
Translated by T. J. Hochstrasser
What is the goal of those who teach natural law and ethics? Is it not
to bring men to the observance of justice and the practice of virtue?
—The Author
I. Natural laws, natural jurisprudence, and moral sciencearethreethings
that are often confused in ordinary language because they all three have
the same object: to know how to order the customs and conductof men.
But in handling a topic clearly and securely it is necessary to separateout
carefully those issues that are in reality distinct.
II. A law is in general a rule by which we are obliged to determine our
actions; and natural laws, in particular, are those that we derive from
nature, or whose rationale is found in the essence and nature of man,
and of things in general.
III. Natural jurisprudence is a general theory of the duties of man, con-
sidered simply as man, or a science, which teaches us what is naturally
good or bad in man, what he must and must not do.
IV. Moral science or ethics is a practical science, which teaches us how
we should direct our faculties to practice what is good, and avoid what
1. [[For persons and books referred to in these essays, see the biographicalsketches
and the bibliography of works cited by Vattel. Droit has been translated as “right”
or “law,” according to context. Utile/utilite´ has been translated as “self-interest,”“ex-
pediency,” or “interest,” according to context. Honneˆtete´ and its cognates have been
translated as “integrity.”]]


748
additional essays
is bad. Often the term moral science is employed to designate the study
of behavior ingeneral,andinthissenseitincludesnaturallaw andethics.
Sometimes moral science seems to mean the theory of our duties, insofar
as we are obliged to employ them, for ourselves, as rational creatures;
and natural law includes the theory of these same duties insofar as we
are bound to them in respect of other men, as members of human so-
ciety, or as others have the right to require that we observe them. But
our distinction (§III) is more tidy and convenient, and it contains ev-
erything, for natural law comprises also our duties toward ourselves.
V. With that established, we look for the foundation of natural law, and
the principle which compels us to practice what it prescribes for us, and
avoid what it forbids us. On these two points there have been major
disputes among the learned.
VI. If by the foundation of natural law we understand the source from
which can be derived the rules and precepts; the principle in which is
found what can provide an explanation for why these rules and precepts
are as they are, then we would not wish to look further than in the essence
and nature of man and things in general. For, since natural law is the
science which tells us what is naturally good or bad in man (§III), how
shall we determine what is naturally good or bad for him, if not through
his essence and nature, and by the nature and essence of things, through
considering the degree of suitability between actions and this essence
and this nature? This truth is conﬁrmed a posteriori or by experience.
To determine whether someone has given an accurate idea of the laws
of nature, examine what there is in man and in other things that is in
accordance with their essence and nature, and you will see how you will
understand clearly from that why our free actions must be regulated and
determined in the manner that natural law prescribes.2 It would be easy
to give examples of this. But each person can put this to the test for
himself.
2. See Wolff, Phil. Pract. Univ., part I, §cxxxvii.


foundation of natural law
749
VII. All the authors of different systems are obliged to agree with what
we have just established, whatever their sense may be of the principle of
obligation, which we shall speak of presently. Those who delude them-
selves that natural law was invented for the beneﬁt of human society,
must agree that the source of this view can only bethe natureandessence
of things and of man in particular. For, I ask you, where could these
would-be inventors have learned with such certainty that some actions
are useful to the human race and that others are harmful, if not by con-
sidering the harmony or disharmony of these actions with the nature of
man and the nature of things? Therefore it is on this nature that they
have had to base their whole theory of rules and the laws of natural
jurisprudence.
VIII. The same must be said of those who assign the instituting of nat-
ural law to the arbitrary will of God. For, at the same time as they rec-
ognize God as a wise being, who ordains nothing without wisdom, they
must agree that God could only give lawssuitabletothenatureof things,
and particularly to the essence and nature of man, whom he instructs
to observe them; laws whose rationale is foundinthisessenceandnature.
We can go further: how do these authors know that God has laid down
such-and-such laws rather thanothersquitecontrarytothem?Doubtless
it is because knowing that God is a wise being, they consider, rightly,
that he could only give laws that are the most appropriate to man, the
most advantageous to the good of society in general, and to that of each
individual in particular. But how will they know these most advanta-
geous of laws? They will consider the nature of man and things, and
they will see which laws are most appropriate to them. They are required
to draw on the same source as us. This is sufﬁcient to show that natural
law is founded on the essence and nature of things and of men in par-
ticular. Cicero recognized this when he said that law is established by
nature: natura ipsa constitutum est jus.
IX. We attain knowledge of these laws through reason. This faculty of
the soul teaches us what is the essence and nature of man and of things
in general, and makes us see the aptness or inappropriateness of actions


750
additional essays
in relation to this essence and nature: from this we derive general rules
or laws which constitute the body of natural jurisprudence.
X. But it is not enough that these laws exist and that they are known:
for men to be obliged to obey them they must also be effective.Everyone
agrees that they are so bound, but authors disagree on the principle of
this obligation. Some derive it from the authority of a superior, whichcan
only be God, the author of nature; others base it on the very beauty of
virtue, which, by its nature, is preferable to vice. Finally, others say that
man, being a rational and sociable creature, must act in conformitywith
this character. Let us try to determine the true and ﬁrst principle of this
obligation and reveal where all these authors agree and are right, and
where their views err. To succeed in this it is absolutely necessary to de-
velop a clear and distinct idea of things, and to provide gooddeﬁnitions.
We shall see that it is as a result of having neglected this rule that clever
authors have caused themselves so much embarrassment in this matter,
and have seemed to fall into views that are so mutually opposed.
XI. To determine what obligation is requires ﬁrstan examinationof what
is commonly understood when this term is employed. Ask any man who
says, “We are obliged to do something,” and you will see that he means
that we are under a kind of necessity to do this very thing; that we are
compelled, bound, tied—as if forced—although not forced or con-
strained physically by an external cause that acts violently upon us, but
morally, and in a way that free beings can be engaged to do something
even against the urging of their passions. Now, what are the reasons
which bring free beings to act even against their inclination, without
physical compulsion or external causes? They can only bemotives, which
being immediate to the soul, perceived and evaluated by reason, make
us feel the necessity of acting in such a fashion and resolve the will,often
against the heart’s inclination and despite the resistance of the passions.
How therefore are we compelled to take a certain action? It is through
the linkage of a powerful motive with this action. Thus, there are two
issues to consider in respect of obligation: 1. The principle which gives
birth to or which constitutes it, which creates the obligation; 2.Thecon-
dition in which we ﬁnd ourselves when we are so obligated.
foundation of natural law
751
XII. Hence it follows that obligation is characterized as active and pas-
sive. Active obligation is the connection of the motive with the action.
Passive obligation is a moral necessity3 to act or not to act.4 The former
is the principle which sways the intelligent being, and the latter is the
condition in which this being ﬁnds himself.
XIII. Passive obligation produces active obligation just as cause gives
birth to effect. For, if it is morally necessary to act, it is necessary to wish
to act. Now, there is no will in the soul without motivation; thereforeto
bring about the moral necessity to undertake a particular action, some
motivation must be linked to this action, which you cannot separate
from it.5
XIV. There is good reason why we pause to demonstrate this origin for
passive obligation. It proves the reality of our deﬁnition and shows that
we are in agreement with the most famous writers, though sometimes
with this difference—that these authors have restricted themselves to
showing the effect of obligation, without explaining clearly its content.
Some have deﬁned passive obligation and not active obligation: “Obli-
gation,” says Pufendorf, “is a moral quality by virtue of which we are
compelled, by a moral necessity, to accept or endure something.”6 But
he does not say in what this moral quality consists. Grotius also uses this
expression, that an action is morally necessary, to say that we are obliged
to do it; but he does not in any way deﬁne obligation. 7
XV. Those who only have extremely confused ideas of all this will per-
haps object that it is duty which creates obligation, and that we are
obliged to undertake certain actions because they are in line with our
duty, and abstain from others because they conﬂict with it. Nothing is
3. A thing is morally necessary when it cannot fail to happen, given the nature of
the intelligent being which produces it; just as it is said that a thing is physically
necessary when it cannot fail to happen, given the nature of the physical agent that
creates it.
4. See Wolff, Phil. Pract. Univ., part I, §cxviii.
5. Idem, §cxix.
6. Droit de la nature et des gens, book 1, ch. i, §xxi.
7. De Jure Belli ac Pacis, l. I, c. 1, §x.


752
additional essays
more common than this way of speaking; it is why it matters to throw
light on the problem, although, as we shall see, it consists only of pure
gibberish. Let us see therefore what is this duty on which obligation is
based.
XVI. Our duty is no more than the way in which we must determine or
direct our actions so that they are good and right.8
XVII. Now, a free action is good or right when it has its justiﬁcation in
the essence and attributes of the being that produces it,9 that is to say,
when a reason or explanation can be given through the essence and at-
tributes of this being as to why his action has had to be so and not oth-
erwise.10 This recalls what we have said (§VI) about the match or mis-
match of actions with the essence of the nature of man and of things,
which creates the foundation of natural law and the source of the laws
that compose it. It still remains to ﬁnd out the nature of the obligation
we are under to live according to our duty, and, in consequence, the
objection we have just witnessed is only empty verbiage. The same out-
come will hold good if the term duty is considered in another sense,
according to which particular duty is an action decided on in accordance
with law, in such a way that we are compelled to resolve on it in this way.
For in this sense, it is obligation, which constitutes duty, and so, it does
not stem from duty.
XVIII. Mr. Barbeyrac in his notes on Grotius and Pufendorf provides
no deﬁnition of obligation at all; except that, while saying that there is
no obligation without a superior, he makes it appear that we are subject
to the will of a superior, which compels us to bring our conduct into
conformity with this superior’s laws. But it is plainly a confusion to in-
terpret obligation as dependency or submission. We still have to explain
why this dependence binds us; why we must preserve this submission.
8. In Latin rectae. The correctness of an action, rectitudo, means what is under-
stood by the words right, just, good, praiseworthy, etc.
9. The difference which exists between free actions, in respect to this correctness,
is what is called the morality of actions.
10. Wolff, Theol. nat., part I, §dccccl.

foundation of natural law
753
If we ask this learned man, “Why must we obey a superior?” he will not
reply, “Because we are obliged to.” This would be to say nothing and to
explain like with like. Will he say that it is because this obedience is just,
in conformity with the rules of order, orbecause thissuperiorcanpunish
us if we rebel against him? But in that case he is citing to us the motives
which are linked to this action of obedience, and he falls back on our
deﬁnition, according to which obligation is the connection or link of mo-
tive with action.
XIX. Now this deﬁnition is adequately established if the ﬁrst principle
of obligation can be found which binds us to the observance of natural
law, to a principle which is truly primary, which does not stem from any
other. Then it is clear that we can only ﬁnd it in a general motive which
moves us, without drawing its effectiveness from any other, and which,
in contrast, all the others relate to as branches or subsidiary motives,
which draw all their strength from this common source.
XX. Given that motives act on us in accordance with our desires, to
discover what we are looking for, we must see if there is in our soul an
affection or essential and basic desire, which does not derive from an-
other, and on which all the others rely. We do not need a long period of
reﬂection to convince us that there is no inclination, desire, or affection
more essential to us, or more basic and general, than self-love, which
causes us to desire and seek for our happiness or the perfection of our
condition, whether internal or external, i.e., the perfection of our soul,
the well-being of our body, and the prosperity of our fortune.
XXI. That being so, the most general motive that inﬂuencesus,thisbasic
motive which stemsfrom noother, canonlybewhatreliesonthisgeneral
and basic inclination. Now, what is this motive, which stems from self-
love or our desire for happiness? It is, for sure, our well-being, our ex-
pediency, our advantage. Experience reveals this truth clearly to the eyes
of whoever wishes to pay some attention to what takes place inside his
own mind. Let us investigate carefully, let us examine attentivelytheway
in which our wishes are formed, and we shall see that we neverdetermine
on an action through the perception of some beneﬁt that we think we


754
additional essays
perceive in it, whether for perfection or peace and the pleasure of our
soul, or for the well-being of our body, or for the proﬁt of our fortune.
Every motive returns, ultimately, to real or perceived expediency. But we
must observe in passing that if our greatest good comprises the perfec-
tion of our soul, then the motives that relate to it—for example, those
which derive from obedience owed to a being such as God, independent
of all fear, beauty, and virtue—these motives, I say, may be considered as
the noblest with good reason. After them, those that are concerned with
thegoodof thebodyarethemostrational;ﬁnally,themotivesthatprovide
us with the condition of our fortune take the third place.
XXII. If our expediency and our well-being are therefore the predomi-
nant motivation, the most basic motive that drives us, we mustconclude
that this good, this expediency, is the ﬁrst principle of all obligation, and
in particular of the obligation to keep to natural law. There is no doubt
that our expediency is linked to this observance, for natural law is a sci-
ence that teaches us what is naturally good or bad in man (§III); and the
natural laws that comprise this law only prescribe some actions and for-
bid others as a result of the harmony or disharmony of these actions
with our nature and the nature of things (§VI).
XXIII. Man is a social animal; society is natural to him; indeed, it is even
essential to him if he is to pass his life happily. From this observation
the judicious Grotius adopted the sociability of man as the foundation
of natural law; and that is very reasonable provided that we do not take
it as the ﬁrst principle of obligation, but only as the next principle from
which the duty derives for all men to follow the laws which must govern
the natural society which exists among them, and without which they
cannot survive.
XXIV. Each individual has as a general and overriding motive his own
self-interest, and this motive creates the obligation to which he is liable:
it is the unvarying principle of his decisions, against which it would be
absurd to claim that he could be made to act. But if society is useful and
even necessary to him, and this society is unable to subsist without laws
or general rules observed by all its members, he is obliged, by virtue of


foundation of natural law
755
his own expediency, to follow them. He ought not even consider sacri-
ﬁcing them to an immediate advantage, because they are what guarantee
him peaceful enjoyment of all his other goods.
XXV. That is the foundation of civil laws and the principle of the sub-
mission that we owe to them. Men, who are required by their needs to
form individual societies, will deﬁnitely not give up their own self-
interest and expediency onenteringthem.Onthecontrary,itwasdoubt-
less on account of this very beneﬁt that they each decided to make these
commitments. But readily perceiving that such a host of evils and dis-
advantages might arise among people so often blinded by or taken up
with their passions (if every individual had the freedom to decide, in
particular instances, what was the best course of action for him), they
understood that they had to establish laws that were sufﬁcient to guar-
antee the happiness of society. They adjusted them, so far as waspossible
for a majority, to the interest of each member. Everyone felt that these
laws, if they were to achieve the desired effect, must be observed reli-
giously; that exceptions could not be made from them without weak-
ening or destroying them, and that therefore on this occasion they had
to sacriﬁce an immediate advantage to a greater good, since laws are the
basis of our peace and security. That is the true principle of the obli-
gation we have to observe them, a principle to which all men subject
themselves without difﬁculty.
XXVI. The view that I established (§XXI) on the principle of obligation
is not new, and I ﬁnd in a note of Mr. Barbeyrac, on the great work of
Pufendorf,11 a passage in which I see with a particular pleasure, that a
learned Englishman shared exactly the same views: “According to him,
duty or obligation, in respect of man, can only be a reason or motive put
forward in an appropriate manner, which makes him decide to choose
or to prefer one way of acting over another; and this reason or motive
can only be the avoidance or acquisition of a very high degree of un-
happiness or happiness, which cannot be avoided or gained by acting in
another manner. He does not acknowledge any other obligation—or if
11. Book I, ch. vi, §v, note 4.

756
additional essays
there be some other type, he believes that by examining it carefully it
will be seen to resolve itself into the same kind.” Thus Mr. Bernard ex-
presses the thoughts of Mr. Gastrell:12 which are precisely in line with
what I have tried to establish.
book i: nations in themselves
parliament entered into a debate on making so considerable a change,
and the whole nation was voluntarily silent upon it, this would be con-
sidered as an approbation of the act of its representatives.
But in treating here of the change of the constitution, we treat only
of the right: the question of expediency belongs to politics. We shall
therefore only observe in general, that, great changes in a state being
delicate and dangerous operations, and frequent changes being in their
own nature prejudicial, a people ought to be very circumspect in this
point, and never be inclined to make innovations without the most
pressing reasons, or an absolute necessity. The ﬁckleness of the Athe-
nians was ever inimical to the happiness of the republic, and at length
proved fatal to that liberty of which they were so jealous, withoutknow-
ing how to enjoy it.
We may conclude from what has been said (§31), that if any disputes
arise in a state respecting the fundamental laws, the public administra-
tion, or the rights of the different powers of which it is composed, it
belongs to the nation alone to judge and determine them conformably
to its political constitution.
In short, all these affairs being solely a national concern, no foreign
power has a right to interfere in them, nor ought to intermeddle with
them otherwise than by its good ofﬁces, unless requested to do it, or
induced by particular reasons. If any intrude into the domesticconcerns
of another nation, and attempt to put a constraint on its deliberations,
they do it an injury.
chapter iv
Of the Sovereign, his Obligations, and his Rights.
The reader cannot expect to ﬁnd here a long deduction of the rights of
sovereignty, and the functions of a prince. These are to be found in trea-
tises on the public law. In this chapter we only propose to shew, in con-
sequence of the grand principles of the law of nations, what a sovereign
is, and to give a general idea of his obligations and his rights.
§35. The
nation ought
not to attempt
it without
great caution.
§36. It is
the judge of
all disputes
relating to the
government.
§37. No
foreign power
has a right to
interfere.
§38. Of the
sovereign.


chapter iv
97
We have said that the sovereignty is that public authority which com-
mands in civil society, and orders and directs what each citizen is to per-
form, to obtain the end of its institution. This authority originally and
essentially belonged to the body of the society, to which each member
submitted, and ceded his natural right of conducting himself in every
thing as he pleased according to the dictates of his own understanding,
and of doing himself justice. But the body of the society doesnotalways
retain in its own hands this sovereign authority: it frequently intrusts it
to a senate, or to a single person. That senate, or that person, is then the
sovereign. <13>
It is evident that men form a political society, and submit to laws,
solely for their own advantage and safety. The sovereignauthorityisthen
established only for the common good of all the citizens; and it would
be absurd to think that it could change its nature on passing into the
hands of a senate or a monarch. Flattery therefore cannot, without ren-
dering itself equally ridiculous and odious, deny that the sovereign is
only established for the safety and advantage of society.
A good prince, a wise conductor of society, ought to have his mind
impressed with this great truth, that the sovereign power is solely in-
trusted to him for the safety of the state, and the happiness of all the
people,—that he is not permitted to consider himself as the principal
object in the administration of affairs, to seek his own satisfaction, or
his private advantage,—but that he ought to direct all his views, all his
steps, to the greatest advantage of the state and people who have sub-
mitted to him.* What a noble sight it is to see a king of England ren-
* The last words of Louis VI. [[Louis the Fat, r. 1108–37]] to his son Louis VII.
[[Louis VII, the Younger, r. 1137–80]] were—“Remember, my son, that royalty is but
a public employment of which you must render a rigorous account to him who is the
sole disposer of crowns and sceptres.” Abbe´ Velly’s Hist. of France, Vol. III. p. 65.
Timur-Bec declared (as he often before had done on similar occasions) that “a
single hour’s attention devoted by a prince to the care of his state, is of more use and
consequence than all the homage and prayers he could offer up to God during his
whole life.”[[Timur-Bec,orTamurlane,ca.1336–1405,Mongolwarlord;asconqueror
of much of central Asia, he founded the Timurid dynasty.]] The same sentiment is
found in the Koran. Hist. of Timur-Bec, Book II. ch. xli. [[Sharaf ad-Din ÛAli Yazdi,
§39. It is solely
established for
the safety and
advantage of
society.


98
book i: nations in themselves
dering his parliament an account of his principal operations,—assuring
that body, the representatives of the nation, that he has no other end in
view than the glory of the state, and the happiness of his people,—and
affectionately thanking all who concur with him in such salutary views!
Certainly a monarch who makes useof this language,andbyhisconduct
proves the sincerity of his professions, is, in the opinion of the wise, the
only great man. But in most kingdoms, a criminal ﬂattery has long since
caused these maxims to be forgotten. A crowd of servile courtiers easily
persuade a proud monarch that the nation was made for him, and not
he for the nation. He soon considers the kingdom as a patrimony that
is his own property, and his people as a herd of cattle from which he is
to derive his wealth, and which he may dispose of to answer his own
views, and gratify his passions. Hence those fatal wars undertaken by
ambition, restlessness, hatred and pride;—hence those oppressive taxes,
whose produce is dissipated by ruinous luxury, or squandered uponmis-
tresses and favourites;—hence, in ﬁne, are important posts given by fa-
vour, while public merit is neglected, and every thing that does not im-
mediately interest the prince, is abandoned to ministers and subalterns.
Who can, inthisunhappygovernment,discoveranauthorityestablished
for the public welfare?—A great prince will be on his guard even against
his virtues. Let us not say, with some writers, that private virtues are not
the virtues of kings,—a maxim of superﬁcial politicians, or <14> of
those who are very inaccurate in their expressions.Goodness,friendship,
gratitude, are still virtues on the throne; and would to God they were
always to be found there! but a wise king does not yield an undiscerning
obedience to their impulse. He cherishes them, he cultivates them in his
private life: but in state-affairs he listens only to justice and soundpolicy.
And why? because he knows that the government was intrusted to him
only for the happiness of society, and that therefore he ought not to
consult his own pleasure in the use he makes of his power. He tempers
his goodness with wisdom. He gives to friendship his domestic and
private favours; he distributes posts and employments according to
History of Timur-Bec, translated into French by de la Croix. Note added in 1773/1797
editions.]]


XXVII. But let us see what Mr. Barbeyrac puts forward in the samenote:
“The motive for obligation, or what brings about most effective com-
pliance with it, should not be confused with the foundation of obligation
or the reason why we are absolutely required to do one thing or another.
This reason is nothing other than the will of a superior, whose power,
in relation to our own good or evil, then stimulates our will todetermine
our present duty.” The whole problem between this learned commen-
tator and ourselves derives from the fact that he does not deﬁne obli-
gation as we have done (§XVIII). Expediency, he says, is the motive for
obligation, it is not the foundation: we are required to obey a superior.
But we may ask him: what, therefore, is the foundation of obligation,
and for what reason am I to obey a superior? You will tell me that it is
my duty to obey him because I am dependent on him. That still does
not enlighten me.
XXVIII. I continue: why must I respect this dependency? Why must I
fulﬁll my duty? And if I violate it, what will happen? You will punish
me, you will say. And there we have the motive that createsmyobligation
to this duty: by breaking with it, I bring harm to myself. But if I could
avoid the punishment, would this transgression still be an offense? Yes,
you say—and why? Because I must obey a superior who has a legitimate
authority over me: my disobedience would be a bad act. But why should
I not commit an evil act when it will draw down no punishment upon
me? You cannot respond with anythingmorerationalthanthis:“Incom-
mitting an evil act, an act contrary to order and reason, you depart from
the perfection of your being.” And that brings us back tomy view,which
bases obligation on expediency, for it is without doubt advantageous to
12. Nouvelles de la Re´publique des Lettres, April 1700, p. 408. [[In 1699 the French
Reformed theologian Jacques Bernard began a continuation of Pierre Bayle’s Nou-
velles de la Re´publique des Lettres (1684–87), which appeared until 1710.]]


foundation of natural law
757
me to be perfect. Let us not pursue any further a matter we have already
touched upon (§XVIII).
XXIX. I ﬂatter myself that by developing ideas carefully and deﬁning
the meaning of terms precisely, as I have tried to do, the reader will see
a way of reconciling Mr. Barbeyrac with us, and that this scholar will
himself come to agree.13 The will of a superior, as we have just seen, is
not the ﬁrst principle or the foundation of obligation. But it is, doubtless,
a proximate principle of real substance: ﬁrstly, because disregarding the
integrity inherent in the action that is prescribed for us, it is ﬁne and
praiseworthy to obey a legitimate superior; and secondly, because this
superior can recompense or punish us, independently of the good orevil
that our action naturally entails. And when this superior is recognized
as very wise, and all-powerful, his will alone imposes on us a true obli-
gation, even if we might not perceive the integrity of the action that he
prescribes to us, or the relation that it can have in itself with our hap-
piness. I would gofurther:evenif webelievedwesawsomethingharmful
to us in the situation—in a word, when we do not know the reasons for
the law that he gives us. For we can relate to him; we rely on his wisdom
for the integrity of the action and on his goodness for the usefulness of
this very action; and it is by virtue of this legitimate trust that we can
say when he prescribes a law that his will takes the place of reasons.14
Moreover, while this act might be unimportant in itself, whether in
terms of its integrity or our self-interest, or even contrary to it, the act
becomes good and praiseworthy as soon as he prescribes it, and he is the
master through his omnipotence who can attach such a reward as he
considers appropriate, and compensate us a hundredfold for the harm
that it will have caused us. To God alone, as a wise and all-powerful
superior, is this unlimited trustdue.Butasaresulttheoccasionforaction
can only exist when this sovereign legislator gives us revealed laws. For
natural laws, we only know them to be the laws of God, by the reasons
13. At the time of writing Mr. Barbeyrac was still alive.
14. “Thus will may stand in the place of reason.” Wolff, Phil. Prac. Univ., part 1,
§cxxxii, in note.


758
additional essays
for these laws—by the reasons which show their justice and expediency;
so, if we do not see wise reasons for undertaking a particular action or
abstaining from it, we cannot know if it is thewill of Godthatweshould
do it or avoid it. Let us recall here a passage of Mr. Barbeyrac, even if it
is a little long; the reader, on comparing it with what we have just said,
will see clearly the heart of the problem, how our principles cause it to
vanish, and how they may serve to reconcile opinions which at ﬁrst sight
seem so opposed:15 “Theauthor[Grotius]hereimaginesthattheremight
be an obligation to do or not do certain things, even if he did not have
to answer to anybody for his conduct. And there is no need to be aston-
ished that his ideas on this point are not quite in order, since we still see
today, not only that the majority of philosophers and scholastic theo-
logians, but also some authors who elsewhere are very judicious and in
no way slaves to scholastic prejudice, areall obstinateinmaintainingthat
the rules of natural law and ethics, impose in themselves an absolute
obligation, independent of the will of God. Nevertheless, some argue
in a way that suggests that there is only a dispute over the meaning of
words between the latter and others who are not of the same opinion. I
am going to try, albeit in a few words, to update thoroughly the state of
the debate, and the basis of the disagreement I have with the author. It
is not a matter here of arguing whether by disregarding the will of an
intelligent being or even the will of God our minds can discover the
ideas and relations from which the rules of natural law and ethics can
be deduced. We must agree in good faith with the supporters of theview
that I am combating, that the rules are effectively based on the very na-
ture of things; that they are in conformity with the order that we con-
ceive as necessary to the beauty of the universe; that there is a certain
proportion or lack of proportion, aptitude or unsuitability between the
majority of actions and their objects, which makes sure that we ﬁnd
beauty in some and ugliness in others. But from that alone it does not
follow that anyone is properly obliged to do or not do one thing or an-
15. Translation of On the Law of War and Peace, of Grotius, book I, ch. I, §x,
no. 2, note 4.

foundation of natural law
759
other. The ﬁtness or unsuitability, which we can call the naturalmorality
of actions, is indeed a reason which can cause action or its refusal, but
it is not a reason which imposes an absolute requirement, such as the
idea of obligation implies. This necessity can only come from a superior,
i.e., from an intelligent being outside ourselves, who has the power to
restrict our freedom and to prescribe rules of conduct for us. For proof,
here is my reasoning. If there were some obligation, independent of the
will of a superior, either the nature of things would have to impose it
or our own reason. The very nature of things could not impose any
obligation on us, in any real sense. That there may be a harmonious or
disharmonious relationship between our ideas, this alone does not re-
quire a recognition of this relationship—something further is required
to compel us to make our acts and life conform. Nor can reason by itself
place us under an indispensable necessity to follow the ideas of harmony
or disharmony that it sets before our eyes as based on the nature of
things.” (I do not copy the proof that the author gives of it, which is
found word for word in his reply to the Judgment of Mr. Leibniz, which
I shall look at shortly.16 Let us move on to his conclusion.) “From all
these points I conclude that the maxims of reason, however congruent
they may be with the nature of things, and with the makeup of our
16. [[The great German natural jurist SamuelPufendorf publishedanabridgment
of his De jure naturae et gentium (On the Law of Nature and Nations, 1672) as De
ofﬁcio hominis et civis juxta legem naturalem (On the Duty of Man and Citizen Ac-
cording to Natural Law) in 1673. The latter work was translated into French as Les
devoirs de l’homme et du citoien in 1707 by the Swiss Huguenot Jean Barbeyrac and
became famous throughout Europe. Barbeyrac’s successiveeditionswereincreasingly
heavily annotated, and his fourth edition of 1718 included a French translation, with
Barbeyrac’s response, of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz’s critique of Pufendorf’s De Of-
ﬁcio in a Latin letter composed in 1701. Barbeyrac gave Leibniz’s letter the title “Ju-
gement d’un anonyme sur l’original de cet abre´ge´.” The letter had been printed in
1709 as the Epistola Viri Excellentissimi ad Amicum, quaˆ monita quaedam ad principia
Pufendorﬁani operis, De Ofﬁcio hominis et civis, continentur, but had circulated in
manuscript since its composition. Barbeyrac’s response has been published for the
ﬁrst time in English from the Latin original in Samuel Pufendorf, The Whole Duty
of Man, According to the Law of Nature, ed. I. Hunter and D. Saunders(Indianapolis:
Liberty Fund, 2003). Vattel is here concerned, as he notes, with Barbeyrac’s fourth
edition of Les devoirs of 1718.]]


760
additional essays
being, are in no way binding, until this very same reason has revealed to
us the Author of existence and of the nature of things, who gives the
force of law to these maxims by his will, and imposes on us an indis-
pensable necessity of conforming to them by virtue of the right he has
to limit our liberty as he considers appropriate, and to set such bound-
aries for the faculties he has given us as seem good to him. It is true that
God canordainnothingcontrarytotheideasof harmonyordisharmony
with which reason furnishes us in certain acts; but that does not alter the
fact that the obligation to regulate ourselves according to those ideas
stems uniquely from his will. It matters not whether this will is arbitrary
or not; it is always the will alone which imposes the necessity. Finally, a
proof that the will of God is the source of every duty and obligation,
lies in that fact that when those who have a religion, adopt the rules of
virtue and the maxims of natural law, they must do so, not chieﬂy be-
cause they recognize that these rules are in conformity with the natural
and unvarying ideas of order, harmony, and justice, but rather because
God, their sovereign master, wishes them to follow the rules in their
conduct.” A charming proof, which precisely deﬁnes what is at issue.
But perhaps there is a path of reconciliation between us. We reply to all
this reasoning that men would be obliged to follow natural laws even by
setting aside the will of God, because they are praiseworthy and useful.
But this will undoubtedly adds a great weight to this obligation: it is a
very legitimate and solid foundation although this foundation is not a
basic principle since it derives itself from another from whom it draws
its strength—I mean, our self-interest. Will not the learned commen-
tator on Grotius be obliged to agree, and will he not admit that his note
is useless against a similar system? He adds, “that ultimately it would
otherwise be fairly purposeless that God prescribed anything (to men),
since they would already be held to it: the will and authority of God
would only in this case be a kind of accessory, which would not con-
tribute anything further than to make the obligation stronger.” That
issue, I do not consider as a difﬁculty. In no way does it detract from the
authority of God to say that everything he ordains for us in natural laws
is so ﬁne and useful in itself that we would be obliged to adopt it, even
if God had not ordered it.


foundation of natural law
761
XXX. Another few words about self-interest. There is something am-
biguous about this term: somedeﬁneitunreasonablynarrowly,andseem
to mean by it a crude expediency restricted to property. It is what gives
rise to this note by Mr. Barbeyrac: “There are here twoextremestoavoid:
one is the work of those who by confusing integrity and expediency, and
measuring this expediency according to their own particular interest,
destroy thereby every idea of virtue and vice, all natural law and mo-
rality; the other, on the part of those who believing (with reason) that
the practice of all the virtues, and of all the rules of natural law, is truly
and infallibly to the advantage of all men in every respect, confuse this
expediency with the natural integrity of actions. The ﬁrst is only an in-
eluctable consequence of the other, and a feature from which we can
discern what is truly honorable from what is only so in the erroneous
opinion of men. When I say, we should repay evil with good, but not good
with evil; and men must obey the will of their creator, God, there is in these
statements a congruence so clear and evident that, however little atten-
tion we pay to them, we cannot refrain from acquiescing, and judging
the views they contain both ﬁne and honorable, without needing to
think at all about the advantage which ﬂows from following them. We
are convinced from that point on that any action contrary to these max-
ims is a sin against reason, and we are forced to blame ourselves. The
concept of duty derives from that recognition alone, as does the rational
end to follow duty. It is true that to give full force to all these likemaxims
where we reveal a natural beauty and harmony, we must have been con-
vinced of the truth of the second example I gave. But even when every-
thing is properly reduced to this basic rule, there is no need at all to
consider the unlimited expediency which ﬂows from it as a way of per-
ceiving the obligation we are under to conform to it. More to the point:
it is precisely not on account of this self-interest that we must currently
perform what is in line with the will of God: it is solely because weadmit
we are his dependents and that it is ﬁne and honorable to obey him; and
this would still be so even if (which would be impossible) he demanded
something absolutely without purpose. Whatever view we take of self-
interest, we must not view it simply in itself, but in terms of the product
of the natural and wonderful union that the Creator has established be-


762
additional essays
tween the duty and happiness of his creatures. In a word, to set up ex-
pediency itself as the most real and universal foundation of moral in-
tegrity and of obligation as such, is to muddle concepts and to make
what is secondary into the principal. Let us also recognize thatthosewho
have not known about or have imperfectly understood this expediency
have insufﬁciently acknowledged the intrinsic integrity of the majority
of actions that conform with natural law.”17 It is surely sufﬁcient to re-
spond that when we say that self-interest provides the foundation or the
principle of obligation, we are speaking of a noble and agreed expedi-
ency, which is located mainly in the observance and practice of virtue—
because this observance and practice bring us closer to perfection. I
would argue that that point alone is enough to bring this reasoningtum-
bling down, and to lighten the difﬁculties in which the author entangles
himself, from which he cannot extract himself with the help of his prin-
ciples. When we have a correct understanding of self-interest; when we
have constituted it mainly in the perfection of the soul, a perfectionthat
already deﬁnes our happiness in itself, and which reconciles us with the
good will of the Creator, what danger is there in confusing the meaning
of integrity with expediency? Furthermore—the doctrine of those who
by distinguishing between integrity and expediency maintain that there
arehonestthingsthatarenotusefulandusefulonesthatarenothonest—
is it not, as the ancients have observed, as pernicious as it is insecure?
On this point let us consider the ﬁne words of Cicero: The usage of this
word has been corrupted and perverted and has gradually come to the point
where, separating moral rectitude from expediency, it is accepted that athing
may be morally right without being expedient, and expedient without being
morally right. No more pernicious doctrine than this could be introduced
into human life. 18 And so, we have heard, Socrates used to pronounce a curse
upon those who ﬁrst drew a conceptual distinction between things naturally
17. Translation of On the Law of Nature and Nations of Pufendorf, book II,
ch. III, §x, note 6.
18. De ofﬁciis, book II, ch. iii.


foundation of natural law
763
inseparable. 19 Now that we know what we must understand by the word
expediency, let us conclude with Horace: Self-interest itself is almost the
mother of justice and fairness. 20
XXXI. Since we have begun to examinethereasoningthatMr.Barbeyrac
develops to support his hypothesis, let us add some reﬂections on what
the samescholar, attheend of histranslationof thetreatiseOntheDuties
of Man and Citizen, sets up against the judgment that Mr. Leibniz had
delivered on this work of Pufendorf. This discussion will conclude by
highlighting the use that we can make of our principles. We conclude
this dissertation with these remarks not with the goal of criticizing an
able man, but so as to demonstrate the advantage of a precise method,
and to show how by deﬁning ideas, by making them clear and deﬁning
terms, we can unravel almost painlesslythedebatesinwhichmanyschol-
ars have obstructed us.
XXXII. “The anonymous author,”21 says Mr. Barbeyrac,22 “manifestly
confuses duty with the effects or the motives for itsobservance; thestrength
that duty has in its own right with the force it exercises over the minds
of men in the way that most of them are constituted.” He should say
all men here rather than most. For Mr. Leibniz’s statement that duties
have no force without motives is true of all men without exception; we
have established this earlier by showing how obligation is nothing other
than the link between motive and action (§XI and XII); and this philos-
opher, without any reference to another life, had grounded his view in
the same fashion: “If we are born with such dispositions, and if we have
not been brought up in such a way that we ﬁnd a great pleasure in virtue
and a great distaste for vices (it is fortunate that everyone has not!), there
will be nothing that can deter us from a major crime, when we will be
able, through committing it, to acquire great rewards with impunity.”23
19. Ibid., book III,ch.iii.[[TranslationstakenfromLoebeditioneditedbyWalter
Miller (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1913).]]
20. Satires 3, book 1.
21. Mr. Leibniz.
22. P. 444. I use the 4th edition published in Amsterdam in 1718. [[See note 16.]]
23. P. 442.


764
additional essays
And above all there will be nothing that can induce us to sacriﬁce our
goods and our lives for the sake of our country, or for the support of
law and justice.24 For in the imaginary instance a man would have no
motive to make this sacriﬁce, not even those people who can argue for
the beauty of virtue. However, Mr. Barbeyrac opposes a doctrine which
seems to us so self-evident: “We are obliged,” he says,25 “not only not to
do harm to anyone in the course of obtaining some advantage for our-
selves, but also to give up on occasion our goods, honors, and even our
lives, quite independent of any consideration of the life to come; and
for this sole reason, that these are the duties which the wise Author of
natural law and sovereign leader of the universe has imposed upon us.”
What does the term obliged mean here? If Mr. Barbeyrac has the same
concept of obligation that we have (§XI and XII), then for sure what he
proposes is unsustainable: for there is no motive remaining to be linked
to the action in the case in question. If this scholar means that it is a rule
of law, a maxim of the virtue of sometimes sacriﬁcingourproperty,etc.,
we would agree with him. But how does this relate to a man who, as we
imagine him here, has no taste for virtue and in no way prefers it to vice?
It is not a matter of determining the maxims of right or virtue, but of
knowing the outcomes to which men will be brought or obligated inone
case or another. How will we be able to impose on them a requirement
for action, without recourse to the constraints of physical force? They
are bound to these actions, says our author, by this single reason—that
they are the duties which the wise Author of natural law and sovereign
Leader of the universe has imposed on them. But what purchase has this
reason on a man who has no expectation of this sovereign Legislator,
and who has no love for virtue, and supports as well the hypothesis
against which we are reasoning?
XXXIII. “Which of these two moral outlooks, I ask you,” adds Mr. Bar-
beyrac, “is the most pure, noble, and conformable to the ideas of the
wise pagan authors who have distinguished so clearly between integrity
24. P. 441.
25. P. 445.

foundation of natural law
765
and expediency?” Without getting into an argument about the epithets
pure and noble, let us ask in turn what is the goal of those who teach
natural law and ethics? Is it not to bring men to an observance of justice
and to the practice of virtue? Which moral system is therefore the most
reasonable and useful? The one that, based on the nature of man, bears
him toward virtue through considering hisbest interests?Ortheonethat
is so pure and noble that it is outside our reach and entirely useless as an
inﬂuence on our will? As for the ideas of the wise pagan authors, we have
seen that the wisest had sharply turned away from a clear separation of
integrity and expediency. Socrates, says Cicero, execrated those who were
the ﬁrst in their opinions to have separated things that nature had closely
united.
XXXIV. Mr. Barbeyrac continues: “But how does the reasoning of our
anonymous author match up with what he says here, that there is a level
of natural law which can exist even in the case of an atheist? And also with
what he argues later (§XV) that there would be some natural obligation,
even if someone argued that there is no Divinity?” The anonymousauthor,
or Mr. Leibniz, has not contradicted himself. He argues (p. 445)26 that
to neglect consideration of a life to come, which has an inseparable link with
divine Providence, is to destroy several duties of life. He does not say that
it would destroy all of them: on the contrary, he concedes that there
would still be a large number of duties for an atheist, because there are,
in fact, several where the reasons or motives which bind us, reside in their
expediency, even in respect of this life; and an atheist can also in several
instances readily ﬁnd sufﬁcient motives in the beauty of virtue alone.
Mr. Barbeyrac, at the same time as he accuses his adversary of a contra-
diction, cannot prevent himself stating in the two following pages (446
& 447), what destroys this alleged contradiction. We can read these
pages, and I pass on to another passage.
26. From the cited [[1718 fourth French]] edition of On the Duties of Man and
the Citizen, in which the “Judgment of an Anonymous Author” (Mr. Leibniz) has
been interpolated with the reﬂections of the editor.


766
additional essays
XXXV. “There is no middle course: either the obligation of the rules of
justice among men is absolutely independent of the Divinity, and based
uniquely on the very nature of things, as is the case with the principles
of arithmetic and geometry, or it is not based on the nature of things in
any respect.”27 And why might there be no middle ground ? There is one
tobesure, and hereitis:obligation derivesfromtheverynatureof things,
but the Divinity is among the number of these things, whose nature
determines the rules of justice and injustice, and provides the motives
which constitute obligation. Moreover, we have noted earlier (§XXIX)
that the will of God is also an immediate and very powerful principle
of obligation. It is not difﬁcult to prove what Mr. Leibniz advances—
that the opinion of those who derive every right from the will of a su-
perior is devoid of foundation, and that we need always to come back
to the nature of things. When a man who has no other lights but those
of reason identiﬁes that one action is good and that another is bad, what
proof does he have that it is the will of God that creates the former and
is absent from the latter? His reason, you will say, teaches him that God
wishes for all that is good. Very well. Butthisresponseitself demonstrates
that the intrinsic quality of the action is already a reason to prefer it,
disregarding the will of God; and that the very will of God orders itself
according to this reason. This will is therefore not the ﬁrst principle, the
foundation of the preference that places the good above the bad: it adds
only agreatweighttoreasonderivedfromthenatureof things;andwhen
it is clearly known, it must take the place of everything, and provide us
with a sufﬁcient reason to determine our action without further inves-
tigation, on the particular merits of the prescribed end (§XXIX).
XXXVI. “The nature of things in itself,” adds Mr. Barbeyrac,28 “could
not impose on us an obligation, as such. Whether there is this or that
relation of equality and proportion, harmony or disharmony in the na-
ture of things, that alone does not require us to recognize this relation:
something further is required to limit our freedom and subject our ac-
27. P. 470.
28. P. 470.


foundation of natural law
767
tions to regulation in a particular manner.” It is true that the relations
of harmony or disharmony, which exist between things, do not in them-
selves require recognition of these relations; but the inﬂuence that these
very things can have on our happiness by virtue of these connections is
a powerful motive which compels us to act or not since obligation is the
link between motive and action (§XI). There is the extra factor that Mr.
Barbeyrac requeststolimitourfreedomandsubjectouractionstoregulation
in a particular manner.
XXXVII. “Nor can reason,” he continues,29 “considered in itself, and
independent of the Creator who has given it to us, place us under an
absolute necessity of following these ideas, although it approves them
as based on the nature of things. For, ﬁrst, the passions set against these
abstract and speculative ideas, ideas based on emotion and sensibility
etc.” If reason shows us clearly that by following these ideas based on the
nature of things we are working toward our greater good, to our true
happiness, then it sets us under a necessity of following it; since this
necessity is nothing other than passive obligation (§XII), which derives
from active obligation (§XII), which consists of the link between motive
and action (§XI & XII). Given that self-love and a desire for happiness
are the strongest and most all-encompassing of our passions (§XX), will
that passion be able to overcome the counsels of reason successfully,
when reason will show us clearly the link between our happiness and a
certainaction? Ratheritwillenlightenusastothetrulyappropriateroute
to our happiness, and our passions themselves will bring us to perform
our duty.
XXXVIII. “Why,” says our author on the same page, “should we follow
the lights of our own minds, rather than the inclination of our hearts,
if there is no external principle—no being beyond us—to whom we are
subject?” It is because we understand that the lights of our minds will
lead us more securely to happiness than the inclination of our hearts.
And setting aside this thought, what might be this principle external to
our will?And howmightthisbeingbeyondourselvescompelustofollow
29. P. 471.

768
additional essays
his orders freely, rather than our inclination? For sure, he can only make
us his subjects by motives capable of inﬂuencing our wills. He might
force us through physical action, but this would no longer be a matter
of a required obligation, for we would no longer be acting freely. For
sure, it is true that regard for a sovereign Master, our Creator, is highly
efﬁcacious in placing an obligation on us to practice the duties of mo-
rality. It is why Mr. Leibniz said earlier that to neglect consideration of the
life to come, which has an inseparable link with divine Providence, is to
deprive natural law of the ﬁnest of its parts, and to destroy at the same time
several duties of life. Indeed, although every good action is useful in itself,
and every bad action harmful, there are a thousand instances in which
we do not see clearly enough the inﬂuence that actions have in them-
selves on our happiness, however much this reﬂection bears down on
the strength of our inclinations. But the concept of a wise God, a good
and just disposer of good and evil—this concept, I say, is always at the
forefront of our minds—and directs us to an action that we know to
conform to his will, even though we do not perceive at that moment the
reasons bound up in the very nature of this action which should bring
us to give it our preference. Besides, we should note that this concept of
a divinity only acts on us as a motive. Why therefore is it so powerful in
making up our minds and placing us under such a strong obligation? It
is because we are convinced that nothing is more important for our hap-
piness than a perfect obedience toward an omnipotent Being, whoholds
our fate in his hands and whose orders are always wise and just.
XXXIX. Mr. Barbeyrac has foreseen this reply. Let us look at his re-
sponse.30 “Reason, you say, shows us clearly that by following the rules
of harmony, based on the nature of things, we will act in a fashion more
in line with our interests, than if we allow ourselves to be led by our
passions. But is not every man free to give up his interest, insofar as there
is nothing besides to prevent him, and there is no other person who is
concerned that he does not act against his interests, and has the right to
require that he pursue them?” It is not a matter here of some petty in-
30. P. 471 & 472.


foundation of natural law
769
terests, or some advantages of fortune which we recognize each man is
free to renounce; it is a question of our greatest interest, since the author
himself says that all things considered, our interest requires that we follow
what reason dictates. And he has to be understood in this sense, for oth-
erwise all his reasoning would be meaningless against ours. But, good
God, what a moral system! And for whatkindof beingswillitbecreated?
If every man were free to give up his greatest interest, what would be-
come of obligation? Where would duties be? What obligation, Iaskyou,
or what duties would there be for a man who gave up his temporal and
eternal happiness? If he is capable by himself of renouncing it, what
could there be besides to prevent him? And why should the rights of an-
other person concerned about his conduct matter to him? I agree that this
other person will have the right to restrain him as a madman is restrained
with a tourniquet; but this person will never be able to oblige him to act
voluntarily. Our author would never have advanced such unsustainable
paradoxes if he had worked out clear notions of these matters, and if
he had begun by providing good deﬁnitions of terms. We have shown
(§XI & XII) that obligation can only be understood as the connection
between motive and action, from which it follows that there is no ob-
ligation at all for a man who renounces all his interests. And as for duty,
however we may deﬁne this term, we shall never be able to show that a
man capable of giving up happiness has duties. If we say that our duty
is the manner in which we must determine our actions, whether they
are good or bad (§XVI), or that a duty is an action resolvedinconformity
with law, insofar as we are obliged to resolve it in this way; wehaveshown
(§XVII) that all the strength of duty in this sense, comes fromobligation,
as we have deﬁned it (§XII). If duties, as they are often deﬁned in the-
ology, are things that we must practice if we wish to please God and to
be happy, it is all the more clear that there is no duty for the man who
has given up all interest. What does it matter to such a man that God
approves, wishes, or commands an action? Why would he obey him if
he does not care at all about doing what is ﬁne and praiseworthy, orwork-
ing to be happy? Now, he will not care one bit if he can renounce all
interest. Finally, in a particular sense our duties in respect of others are
things that they have the right to require from us, that we owe them, so


770
additional essays
that they could with justice do us harm if we refuse to fulﬁll our obli-
gation. But in this sense also, what would theseduties becomeforanyone
who gave us his owninterests?And howcouldhebebroughttorecognize
them other than by force? Will he do for anyone else what he will not
do for himself?
XL. Here is another objection: “But what we must reﬂect carefully on
above all is that our reason, considered outside all dependence on the
Creator from whom we possess it, is ultimately nothing other than our-
selves. Now, no one can impose on himself an absolute necessity to act
or not in one way or another.”31 This is a pure begging of the question.
The objection is based on the view that we have already refuted, that all
obligation comes from an external principle, the will of a superior. Be-
sides, we should note that it is not our reason that imposes obligation on
us: reason only makes apparent the link between motive and action that
constitutes obligation. This link comes from the nature of things, and
it is the Creator who established it when he made the world as itis.There
is also a response which anticipates what Mr. Barbeyrac adds: “For ne-
cessity to truly exist, it cannot cease at the will of the person subject to
it—otherwise it is reduced to nothing.” This necessity or obligation for
sure cannot cease at our behest, for we cannot separate a motive from
an action to which it is joined by the nature of things.
XLI. I believed that these few reﬂections on what the learned translator
of Pufendorf objects to in Judgmentof an AnonymousAuthor couldserve
to shed more light on the subject, and it is in the same light that I shall
conclude by recalling the ﬁne words of the anonymous author, or Mr.
Leibniz:32 “What we have just argued is very useful in relation to the
practice of true piety; for it is not enough to be subject to God as if we
were in obedience to a tyrant; for we must not only fear him on account
of his greatness but also love him because of his goodness. These are the
maxims of right reason, as well as the precepts of Scripture, and they
are where the good principles of jurisprudence lead, which are in accord
31. P. 472.
32. §xvi, p. 476.

foundation of natural law
771
with sound theology and which lead to a true virtue. Thosewhoperform
good actions notthrough a motive of hopeorfearinrespectof asuperior
but following the inclination of their hearts, do not act with justice. On
the contrary, those who act most justly are those who imitate in some
way the justice of God. For when we have done good through love of
God or our neighbor, we take pleasure in our action itself (such is the
nature of love), and we need no further spur or command of a superior.
It is of such a person that it is said ‘the law is not made for the just.’ 33 It
is indeed against reason to argue that law or constraint alone creates the
just man. However, we must concede that those who have not reached
this point of perfection are only made subject to obligation through
hope and fear. It is above all in the expectation of divine punishment
that we ﬁnd a full and complete necessity, which has power to compel
all men to follow the rules of justice and equity.”
33. Timothy I, 9.




773
Dissertation on This Question: “Can Natural
Law Bring Society to Perfection Without the
Assistance of Political Laws?”
Translated by T. J. Hochstrasser
I. This question, proposed in 1742 by the Academy of Dijon, struck me
as chosen with real wisdom; for any reliable and principled handling of
this topic requires reﬂection on the foundation of the nature and goal
of politics. Men are not often given the chance to undertake such
researches.
II. So as to advance this interesting subject in a clear and precisemanner,
and to determine the issue unambiguously, it is necessary above all to
deﬁne the meaning of terms precisely, and to make clear and distinct
the concepts that match them. That is the key point in matters of moral
theory, and once it is resolved, thesolutionfollowsnaturallyandpresents
itself. Let us see therefore what are the perfection of society, natural law,
and political laws.
III. The perfection of a thing consists generally in the harmony or agree-
ment of everything within it in the direction of a common goal; so we
need to see what is the goal of society if we want to get to know exactly
what constitutes its perfection.
IV. Man naturally desires perfection and happiness, and he enjoys gifts
of intelligence and free will to attain them. But he cannot work toward
that goal without a peaceful life, and the resources to provide for his
security and all his needs. There is no one who can obtain these advan-
tages without the help of others. This is what induced men to create a
society in which they promised such reciprocity. The perfection of this
society therefore consists in the provision of arrangements such that not


774
additional essays
only do all members enjoy personal security, but also their labor yields
the necessities and even the comforts of life; as a result there are no ob-
stacles to each pursuing his own perfection, in accordance withtheviews
of God.
V. So that a society can be well founded, so that everything is in order,
and each individual can pursue his own business in peace, there must be
rules of conduct based on wise reasoning and to which all the members
submit. These rules are laws. We recognize two forms of them: natural
and civil law.
VI. Natural law comprises rules of conduct based on the nature of
things, and in particular on the nature of man. We get to know it
through reason. This faculty of the soul reveals to us the agreement or
disagreement which exists between free actions and the nature of things
and man in particular. Moreover, it demonstrates that if we want to act
as rational beings, we must scrutinize carefully these different relation-
ships that actions have with the nature of things, and above all with the
nature of man—relations between good and evil, and the good and the
bad. Reason teaches us that we are under obligation to practice the for-
mer and avoid the latter. Finally, we cannot doubt that in so acting we
are fulﬁlling the will of the Creator, who has imposed the rule of law
on us by the same means that he has established the world as it is.
VII. The ancient philosophers had the same idea of the law of nature
as we do. Here is the deﬁnition that they gave of it: Law is the height of
reason innate in nature, which commands those actions which must be
undertaken and forbids the contrary.1 Cicero adds in the same place: The
same reason, when itﬁndsconﬁrmation andcompletioninthemindof man,
is law. And the same philosopher, in the company of the wisest men of
the ancient world, relates the whole of natural law to this general rule
thatmanmustliveinawaythatconformstohisnature,livinginharmony
with nature. Indeed, from the nature of man can be deduced all the
duties and commands of natural law, in the same way that mathema-
1. Cicero, de Legib. I. 1.


can natural law perfect society?
775
ticians deduce all the laws of movement from this single proposition
based on the nature of bodies: “Every body remains in its state of rest
or movement so long as no external force compels it to leave that
condition.”
VIII. From there it follows that natural law is universal. Since it requires
us to do all that is most suited to our nature, there is no situation in
which it can let us down; for in every situation in which there is a better
option to take, we are ordered to take it; and if it were possible to ﬁnd
a case of perfect indifference, no law would be of any use in resolving
the matter.
IX. Lastly, let us also note that if natural law is essential to man, based
on his nature and the nature of things, it is eternal, immutable, and
prescribed by God. This was the view of the Roman jurists. Indeed, said
the emperor Justinian, natural laws, which are observed for the most part
the world over, remain established and unchanging, established by a divine
Providence. 2 From which it follows self-evidently thatno lawcanbecon-
trary to the law of nature.
X. This is a very important feature to noteof politicalorcivillaws,which
are rules of conduct, established by a public authority for the good of
society, and furnished with a positive obligation, by virtue of the pen-
alties linked to their neglect. As they cannot be contrary to natural law
in any way (para. IX), and have universal application (para. VIII), po-
litical laws correspond at bottom withnaturallaws.Whatseparatesthem
is, ﬁrst, that they are written or pronounced formally and that they re-
ducenatural lawtogeneralrulestocovereveryinstanceof thesamekind;
and, secondly, that they are provided with civil power, and accompanied
with the positive obligation that the threat of punishment adds to nat-
ural obligation.
XI. It is not possible to deduce natural law in the form of general rules
directed to the good of society and adapted to circumstances, without
causing it to undergo some slight alterations, or some deviation in par-
2. Instit. Book I, title II, para. II, De jure nat. gent. et civ.


776
additional essays
ticular instances, and this has given rise to this deﬁnition of civil law
which is found in law six of the Digest: On justice and law: civil law
neither departs wholly from the law of nature or nations, nor is it a slave to
it in every particular. Therefore when we add or subtract something from
common law, we create particular or civil law.
XII. According to the idea that we have furnished of the law of nature,
it is clear that this law is sufﬁcient in itself to bring society to perfection;
and if that were all that were required, I reckon that the issue would be
settled. A law founded on the nature of things, especially on the nature
of man, and which is, in consequence, wisdom and justice itself; a law,
which applies in all instances; a law, in a word, which provides wisely for
everything, is, without doubt, appropriate to regulate society perfectly.
It would invariably produce this outcome if men were as they should
be; if they tried to live in conformity with their nature, while never abus-
ing their freedom. Given the parallel between the laws of nature and the
laws of motion according to the axiom or proposition cited earlier
(para. VII), if men took care to follow all the precepts that ﬂow from it,
just as bodies follow the laws given to them, then the moral world in
human society would bear witness to the same order and harmony that
we look on with wonder in the material world.
XIII. When I say, “If men were as they ought to be,” I do not at all ask
that they exceed their humanity, but only that they make full use of their
faculties. Let us imagine one thousand peopleof bothsexes,chosenfrom
the most rational and virtuous in Europe, and that together they form
a kind of small republic. Who can doubt that this society would not be
better regulated by natural law alone, than has been any other state with
the support of political laws? These one thousand people will be en-
lightened enough to get to know natural law, and to be convinced that
their best interest requires that they conform to it exactly. As a result,
their society will be as perfect a human society as any such can. They
will have a body of law, just, wise, and complete, which is known to all
the members and accompanied by sufﬁcient incentives to shape their
will. Without the need for subordination to the authority of a govern-
ment, they will acknowledge themselves under the obligation of this law


can natural law perfect society?
777
that they derive from nature to provide for the common good. They will
focus their talents and labor on this goal; everyone will compete to pre-
serve order and peace. If differences arise, they will choose arbitratorsto
resolve them. And if it should happen that one individual, possessed by
the force of a violent passion, departs from his duty, then the others,
whose reason would not be obscured by the same clouds, would they
not readily and with one will restrain him without provoking the least
social dislocation? Some might vainly object that regulations would be
required for trade, for example, or for crucial periods of war and epi-
demic disease, and a sovereign authority toensurethattheyareobserved.
But reason will promote wise measures in these instances to the people
as we have imagined them, and natural law will oblige them to preserve
those rules devotedly, as they will tend to social beneﬁt.
XIV. But men are very different both from what they ought to be and
from these one thousand people of whom we have just spoken. Two
considerations make natural law useless in respect of them: ﬁrst, thema-
jority do not know in all instances what it determines, either because
they lack the necessary insight or because their passions and prejudices
throw up an illusion and cast them into error, by representing to them
as legitimate or neutral conduct that is in fact criminal. There are even
subtle circumstances in which theslightestprejudicecanpreventanhon-
est man from seeing the truth that otherwisehewoulddiscern.Secondly,
men are not always sufﬁciently enlightened as to their true interests to
be aware of the incentives with which natural law is accompanied, and
often in the midst of passion these motivations do not present them-
selves to their minds, or do not strike them with sufﬁcient force. Two
considerations bring the man of reason to adherence to this law: ﬁrst,
the obedience which he owes to his Creator; and secondly, the advan-
tages which ﬂow naturally from this adherence. Virtue adorns the soul
and ennobles it through its beauty, and in its results and consequences
it is always more reliably useful than vice: The good hate to sin through
love of virtue. But experience shows only too well how few of these mo-
tives hold sway over the generality of men. Most scarcely think of God
in the fever of their passions, or if they think of him in more collected


778
additional essays
moments, his goodness conveys to them an illusion, and they imagine
that after having satisﬁed their desires, they will easily win pardon. Are
they truly so blind as to underestimate their Creator? As for the second
motivation, how small is the number of those who know and are aware
of it! It would be a pleasant means of preventing a criminal by making
him aware that through his crimes he dishonors the dignity of his being,
and that poverty, accompanied by virtue, is of more lasting worth than
a criminal wealth. A reason which is ﬁne and persuasive in the mind of
a wise man would become absurd in the eyes of a wretch degraded by
vice.
XV. It has therefore been necessary, forthegoodof society,torepairthese
defects and to supply what is missing in natural law—not in itself—but
with regard to the corruption of men. So that this law, perfect in itself,
may become sufﬁcient to regulate a society of men, such as they are,
these steps need to be taken: ﬁrst, that it may be known to everyone and
have a determinate meaning, which is the same for everyone. This is the
way to head off disputes and the swarm of other difﬁculties that might
emergefromthe ignorance,passions,andprejudiceswhichproducesuch
a bewildering diversity of human opinions. It would be too dangerous,
in a myriad of examples, to assign to each person thetaskof determining
in their own fashion what the natural law decides in one case or another.
For example, this law states that a man whose reason is not yet mature,
and who does not have the good sense required to handle business, is
not in a condition to make contracts, and that if someone had abused
his lack of knowledge to make him take on burdensome obligations,
then the contract would be void. There is nothing more just than this
rule, but also nothing better calculated to produce a multitude of quar-
rels and injustices among men who are ignorant, prejudiced, and self-
interested. Individuals would be perpetually at odds, so as to know
whether or not a youth is really in a ﬁt state to handle his affairs, and the
judges would frequently be perplexed in deciding the issue. The hon-
orable magistrate could easily fall into error, and the wicked one would
have his hands free to practice his iniquity. Civil laws have preventedthis
abuse, by setting an age below which a man is a juvenile; i.e., that he is


can natural law perfect society?
779
judged incapable of forming a contract; and the laws have ﬁxed the pe-
riod of his majority at the time when experience has shown that subjects
of the State commonly have the degree of reason sufﬁcient to regulate
their own affairs. So it is for the beneﬁt and peace of society that general
laws have had to be derived from natural law, which can be acknowl-
edged by everyone, where the meaning is ﬁxed and the applicationclear.
Secondly, a source of authority is needed to compel a respect for the laws
on the part of those who are not amenable to the voices of reason, and
which adds to natural obligation, which is too weak for the majority of
men, a new positive obligation through the means of penalties attached
to disobedience. It is the only motive that can inﬂuence the will of the
wicked. The evil hate to sin through fear of punishment.
XVI. But if by setting up a public authority natural law experiences the
two changes or additions that we have just touched on, then it becomes
public law. For the political or civil laws, tobeprecise,differfromnatural
law only in these two respects (para. X).
XVII. Thus, given the depravity of mankind, the good regulation of
society has been seen to depend on two steps: ﬁrst, extending the knowl-
edge of natural law by making its application easy, and as a result re-
ducing it to clearly publicized general rules; secondly, establishing a pub-
lic authority, and adding a positive obligation to natural obligation,
through the means of punishments (para. XV). To do that is nothing
other than to establish civil or political laws (para. XVI); and thus it is
demonstrated that in the current condition of the human race, natural law
cannot bring society to perfection without the assistance of political laws.
XVIII. We have already remarked that those laws must never becontrary
to the law of nature. It is only in examples where there is a necessary
deviation that they can be separated; for it would be impossible to do
otherwise without giving up all the beneﬁts that these laws produce for
society: natural law itself states that one must always choose the lesser
of two evils. For example, Louis XIV [of France] wisely established un-
der his ordinance of April 1667 that every transaction that exceeds the
sum or value of one hundred livres, even a voluntary trust, must be

780
additional essays
signed off in front of lawyers or under formal signature; and that wit-
nesses will not be recognized outside the content of those documents.
It is certain that, according to natural law, a man who has acknowledged
a debt, whether major or minor, or who has received money on trust,
and who has promised verbally to pay back or return it, is no less obli-
gated than if he had made undertakings in writing. However, French
law wisely determines that he cannot be compelled because it is more
useful to head off a host of lawsuits than harmful for one man to be
deprived of the sum of money he is owed. Besides, it is up to thecreditor
to know the law and take precautions, and if he neglects them then he
has no right to complain.
XIX. If the help of state laws is necessary to provide natural law with its
full force, we must not imagine that that is sufﬁcient and that we can
neglect the study of the latter. On the contrary, the two categories of
law must always be kept together, and lend each other mutual support.
The legislator who wishes to provide a State with good laws, must know
natural law to perfection, and be governed by itsalwaysinfalliblerulings.
It is indeed the true source of law, as the ancients rightly remarked: may
I reach back to the source of law through nature, says Cicero.3 When po-
litical or civil laws are established, those to whom their execution is en-
trusted must exercise fairness in interpretation, and apply the study of
natural law. Knowledge of itis evennecessaryformembersof thepublic.
Cases repeatedly present themselves which the legislator has not fore-
seen, and in which we have no other guide than nature.
XX. A good philosophy is the only means of reaching to a precise and
reliable knowledge of the law of nature—a knowledge that is essential
to anyone who wishes to be well trained in the law. This is why Cicero
said that jurisprudence must not be drawn from anything in the Prae-
torian Edict or the Twelve Tables, but from the heart of the deepest
philosophy: the science of law is to be derived not from the praetorianedict,
as several writers now suggest, nor from the Twelve Tables, as earlier au-
3. Cicero, as above. [[De legibus.]]


can natural law perfect society?
781
thorities argued, but deep from within the resources of philosophy. 4 Also,
the wisest of the ancient philosophers, convinced that there is no more
useful social science than morality, devoted their chief reﬂections to this
part of philosophy. Is there, indeed, a science worthier of human atten-
tion than the one that teaches them the ways of being wise and happy?
This is, says Pliny, the most beautiful part of philosophy—to discover and
practice jurisprudence. 5 He speaks of a jurisprudence founded on mo-
rality or on natural law. However, this very part of philosophy is today
the most neglected. Most modern philosophers only study physics or
mathematics. And among the awards that the famous Academies offer
to the learned to stimulate their researches, there is not one devoted to
moral theory. Is there none of these Royal Societies that wishes to merit
the eulogy Cicero offered of Socrates? Socrates was the ﬁrst, however, who
summoned philosophy from heaven, relocated it in cities and introduced it
into homes, and compelled consideration of the meaning of life, customs,
good, and evil. 6
4. De Leg. I. 5 [[The Praetorian Edict was a guide to Roman legalprocedurewhich
each praetor (magistrate) issued before it was standardized under Emperor Hadrian
(a.d. 117–38). The Twelve Tables were the earliest code of Roman law, established
by ten consuls between 455 and 450 b.c.]]
5. Ep. L. I. 10. [[Pliny the Younger, Epistulae (Letters).]]
6. Tuscul. 1. V [[Cicero, Tusculan Disputations]].




783
DIALOGUE Between the Prince of ****
and His Conﬁdant, on Certain Essential
Elements of Public Administration
Translated by Kenneth Goodwin
It was the day of the crowning of the Prince of ****, who had been named
as Successor to the Throne. The Count of ****, the Prince’s Conﬁdant, en-
tered the bedroom early in the morning. He found that the Prince had risen,
and seeing that he appeared to be very busy, remained a little distance away.
When the Prince looked up, the Count began to address him thus:
the count. This is the loveliest day of my life and a very happy one
for the **** [people of this country]. You, my Prince, are going to reign
over them.
the prince. Ah! My dear Count, thankHeaventhattodaywillbereally
happy for the ****! It will nevertheless be dreadful for me.
the count. How so? You seem to fear something that most men regard
as the greatest good fortune, being in a position almost above humanity
[la Condition humaine].
the prince. The crown is scarcely a beneﬁt destined for the particular
advantage of its possessor. I consider it a burden, as difﬁcult an ofﬁce as
it is important.
the count. Ah, my dear Prince! (Allowmetousethisexpression;noth-
ing is more ﬁtting.) Since you have such an idea of Royalty, I am certain
that you will fulﬁll its functions perfectly.
the prince. If the task was less daunting, I would risk promising my-
self that. But who could cope in dealing withsomanyimportantmatters


784
additional essays
that are so varied and so complicated? I believe, however, that I can cate-
gorize them under two general headings, the Glory of the Supreme Be-
ing and the Happiness of the Nation. There you have the twin objects
of my actions and my cares. They are the great ends for every just
government.
the count. You could make this ﬁne aim a great deal simpler since
both goals are intertwined and are dependent upon each other. In all
your steps in the short term, choose the one that pleases you more. Be
constant to it and, being an enlightened Prince, you will achieve your
other goal.
the prince. What you’ve just said, my dear Count, is all very well, and
at ﬁrst sight seems very reasonable. However, I still have something of
a problem. I have been told so often that we must sacriﬁce everything
to the Glory of God, that the goods of this world are not those rec-
ommended to us by our Religion.
the count. The desire to please God must without any doubt be the
great motivation which animates every intelligent Being, and this mo-
tivation should be reﬂected in our deeds. This is what I call “glorifying
God.” But this Supreme Being has no need of men. He demands noth-
ing from us for himself, and if he gives us our Laws, it is as an inﬁnitely
good and wise Father and for our own good. It would be very easy to
demonstrate that for every thinking Being without exception, the paths
of sound Religion [saine Religion] and those of real happiness are one
and the same. Practicing Virtue is the art of making oneself happy. But
now, let us speak about the State, of the Nation as a whole. You under-
stand that Religion can ﬂourish, spread, and be fully effective among
men only in the kindly shade of peace, safety, and good order, which in
turn can be derived only from the establishmentof awell-governedCivil
Society.
the prince. All this is certain. If men used to live without Laws, or
without any form of Government, each living in his own small world,
reasonand experienceshowusequallythatReligionwasnotabletomake
itself heard, be studied, enjoyed, or practiced, in the midst of suchawful
confusion.
the prince and his confidant
785
the count. You see then that Religion is very much interested in the
prosperity of the State and that you will serve it extremely well by work-
ing to encourage this prosperity. Can you conceive of anything more
agreeable to the Common Father of all men than to procure the hap-
piness of an inﬁnite number of His Creatures, by maintaining and se-
curing an Establishment under whose shade men can cultivate their
Souls, improve their Morals, enlighten themselves, understand their
Maker, and serve him by helping their brothers. Allow me in this regard
to quote the words of a Pagan Philosopher: Nihil est enim illi principi
Deo, qui omnem hunc mundum regit, quod quidem in terris ﬁat, acceptus,
quim concilia catusque hominum jure sociati, qui Civitates appellantur. 1
CICERO spoke thus in this ﬁne piece called Scipio’s Dream.
the prince. What an admirable Pagan! It is quite shameful that several
of our Doctors, with so much help that CICERO did not enjoy, should
appear so inferior to him in their reasoning about Morality.
the count. These wise Romans had an excellent maxim. One never
saw them separate the interests of Religion from the true welfare of the
State. Onthecontrary,theyusedtoapplythemselvesconstantlytomain-
tain these two great designs in perfect harmony.
the prince. Their Religion was false, however. And we, who havehap-
pily discovered the true faith, will struggle to reconcile it with thewelfare
of the State. We shall see it often put into direct opposition to the hap-
piness of the Nation!
the count. In the Roman Republic, the same men presided over Re-
ligious Ceremonies and the Affairs of State. They did not recognize the
distinctionbetweentheClergyandtheLaity.SenatorswereHighPriests,
Augurs, performed Altar Rituals, ensured Justice, and commanded
1. “For to the Supreme God who governs this whole universe nothing is more
pleasing than those companies and unions of men that are called cities.” [[Cicero’s
Somnium Scipionis (Scipio’s Dream) formed a digression within the sixth book of his
De republica (On the Republic), in which the consul who commanded at the destruc-
tion of Carthage in 146 b.c., Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus (185–129 b.c.),
meets the adopted grandfather who had defeated Hannibal in the SecondPunicWar,
Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus (236–184 b.c.).]]

786
additional essays
Armies. As these were only different Ministries of the Republic, they
were often carried out by the same persons.
the prince. Should not all citizens, however, irrespectiveof theirsocial
rank, work toward the same goal? Do they not have a common interest,
the prosperity of the State?
the count. You should appreciate, Prince, that men carry their pas-
sions and their individual interests even into the most sacred matters.
the prince. Alas! I know this only too well nowadays. I know too that
such men are more false, more difﬁcult to unmask, when they are mem-
bers of a state which makes them wear a brave face in everyday affairs.
How can I identify those who merit my conﬁdence?
the count. In my view, here are the means. When you ﬁnd a wise
Pastor—moderate, charitable, motivated by a true zeal for the good of
the Kingdom—listen to him, my Prince, and follow his advice in all
matters pertaining to Religion.
the prince. But there are others who only speak to me about the sac-
riﬁces that are owed to God. They say that everything should give way
before the greater interest of the Faith.
the count. Do not listen to such imposing talk. It is all too often used
by the fanatic or the hypocrite. True Piety, enlightened Piety, will not
hold you to vague and obscure ramblings. It will constantly reveal its
Doctrine to you, in happy harmony with the practice of reasonableMo-
rality and sound Politics. Have you not agreed just now that true Reli-
gion can never be opposed to the welfare of the State? It is, on the con-
trary, its most ﬁrm support. The God whoapprovesof andprotectsCivil
Societies, would he allow into the Religion he has imparted to mankind,
any Dogma, any Practice or any Maxim contrary to the well-being of
such necessary institutions? When you see a dogmatic Doctor holding
forth in an incomprehensible manner, or who crosses the threshold into
vulgarity, and is quite useless in his profession, always refusing to com-
promise, and pursuing anyone who does not think like him, can you
doubt that pride and a domineering nature are his motivating impulses,


the prince and his confidant
787
rather than zeal for a Religion which teaches only sweetness and charity?
You will be doing him a kindness if you accuse him of fanaticism.Reject
zeal of this kind and guard against such counsels when these people call
upon you to use your power to persecute their adversaries.
the prince. But ought I not protect our Religion and ﬁghtitsenemies?
the count. Of course you must, my Prince. The means, however,
must be well chosen. It is an error and bad faith to support Religion by
violence and force. Content to force everyone to bend their heads be-
neath the yoke, false Religion is never impeded by the fear of making
hypocrites. But true Religion desires only the happiness of mankind. It
scorns enforced submission and lays claim to reign only in our hearts.
The Truth alone persuades, it does not enter into souls by violence. And
by the same token, when a Pastor does not act in good faith, if he is wise
and prudent he would refrain from advising or ever soliciting persecu-
tion. The blood of Martyrs from every Sect, every Religion, whether
true or false, pours oil upon the ﬂames, a sprinkling which produces in
its turn thousands of followers of these Sects. Add to this consideration
the frightful evils arising in a State which result from persecution, and I
am certain that you will reject all advice from Persecutors with revulsion
and deal with them severely.
the prince. Praise be to God for helping me to understand so clearly
that true Religion does not ever demand anything which is detrimental
to the public good. In working for His Creatures, I will no longer be
afraid of failing the Supreme Being. The happiness of my People will
be my guiding rule. I believe it better for Religion to be in the hands of
a Prince, and far safer than leaving it to the wiles of Theologians. If
Religion, however, does not entail anything contrary to the well-being
of the State, would it be equally true to say that nothing can be of value
to the Kingdom unless at the same time it is given the approbation of
Religion, or at least tolerated by it? Some would raise many questions
with me over this.
the count. I would be very happy if I could alleviate any doubts for
you. Whereas in ordinary Morals, SOCRATES and CICERO roundly


788
additional essays
condemned those whodistinguishedbetweentheusefulandthehonest,2
I would want in any ordered State [Etat police] for everyone to indig-
nantly reject this idea, along with those who wish to set Religion against
the good of the State, and he who dares boast that what damages Re-
ligion is beneﬁcial to Society. The ﬁrst among these people is the wrong-
headed, ignorant, and fanatic Theologian; the second is the false and
superﬁcial Politician.
the prince. I relish your maxims, my dear Count, and it appears to
me that this is how things should be. Help me, though, to resolve some
difﬁculties that occur to me. Take Luxury, for example. People vaunt its
utility in a large Kingdom, but without giving in to too much austerity,
it would seem that Religion does not approve of it.
the count. Yet, Prince, Luxury is as unsuitable to the good of theState
as it is to the purity of Religion.
the prince. One reads about it in pompous eulogies and one hears
these matters being discussed in daily conversation. They say that in a
large State, Luxury is the lifeblood of commerce, industry, and labor. It
is a source of riches, through the high regard that foreigners have for
elegance and arts of every kind, of which Luxury is the source. You can-
not deny that there is something of the truth in all of this.
the count. Before proceeding further, we must ﬁrst agree on what we
deﬁne as Luxury. I understand by this term, excessive expenditure that
goes beyond normal amounts. I am not talking about the necessary and
the useful alone, or yet the convenient or even the agreeable and what
decency demands from its depiction according to rank and station. I say
also that in the usual course of affairs, this spending exceeds the capac-
ities of anyone who indulges in it and it always carries with it some ele-
ment of frivolity.
the prince. Well! Luxury, as you have just deﬁned it, provides em-
ployment for a huge number of workers, enables them to gain their live-
2. Cicero, de Ofﬁc. lib. II. cap. 3. & lib. III. cap. 3.


the prince and his confidant
789
lihood, makes them richer, and through the prestige that it gives to our
tastes and Manufactures, every year brings considerable revenueintothe
Country.
the count. I can tell you another singular fact. We do not have close
at hand, the wherewithal required by Luxury. We lack gold and silver
mines and those for precious stones. The delicious wines of our King-
dom are hardly the only things needed for our delicate and sumptuous
tables. Hungary, Spain, and the Islands furnish them at great expense,
and our much-vaunted fabrics do not stop us from seeking out foreign
alternatives. While I would agree that Luxury brings more money into
the Country than goes out, more money goes out than is useful.
the prince. Nevertheless, riches are very necessary for the defense of
the Realm. They supply a large part of our armed forces.
the count. I scarcely know anyone today who doubts it. The Duc de
SULLY3 will teach you to put this precept into a proper perspective.
When the Kingdom provides you, at much less cost, with larger, more
dependable, braver, and more frugal Armed Forces, would you be any
less powerful with reduced revenue? But I don’t want to give up easily.
Let us consider the Luxury that increases the wealth of the Kingdom
and thus furnishes the means to extend its power. The case for that has
not yet been made.
the prince. I think I understand your line of argument, but do
continue.
the count. Firstly, here’s a ﬁne and delicate question to consider: to
know if our well-kept and well-cultivated agricultural lands would not
provide us with exports as large and with a surer return than all theMan-
ufactures sustained by Luxury. Furthermore, it is clear that Luxury has
caused the neglect of the purely useful or necessary arts like the culti-
vation of the Land and the work of artisans.ItdepopulatestheCountry-
3. See his Memoires. [[Vattel was most likely using the Me´moires de Maximilien
de Be´thune Duc de Sully, principal ministre de Henry leGrand (London[Paris],1752).]]


790
additional essays
side, everybody heads for the Towns, where the means are to be found
of getting rich quickly and with less of a struggle. The Laboring class,
that unique pool of good Soldiers, is thereby diminished. Yet, after all
of these facts, I am told that Luxury increases the force of the State!
the prince. Oh, my dear Count! You are beginning to alarm me, and
I see that those who praise this public menace are shallow Politicians.
They have put before me only their most positive contentions.
the count. That is not the half of it. Let us now see this menace in
its other guises. Can it be denied that Luxury sustains and strengthens
the spirit of softness and frivolity which characterizes this Century?And
what damage has it not caused to your Army? How would they under
similar circumstances sustain the glory of ourforefatherswhowerehard-
ened to toil, indefatigable on the ﬁeld of honor, and when peace obliged
them to lay down their arms, sought their amusement only in gamesand
exercises where they recaptured the memory of their battles?
the prince. Honor, so natural to my Nobility, will sustainourcourage.
My Nobles will ﬂy from their ablutions straight to the battleﬁeld, and
one could hardly accuse them of being driven mad by Luxury.
the count. I do know that, Prince, and have seen it myself. And please
Heaven that this bright ﬂame will always burn despite the universal de-
pravity of morals! Though by unique fortune effeminate leaningsought
never diminish the courage of our young Warriors, Valor is not the only
quality necessary for Soldiers. Wise heads are required to direct all those
arms. Certainly too, I do not see how a young Lord can do this, while
occupied with his pleasures, his appearance, his accoutrements, jewelry,
and baubles. Neither do I see, I can say, how he would be able to acquire
the prudence and wisdom so necessary in a General; nor by what happy
chance resolve and greatness of spirit would ﬁnd a place within him in
the midst of so many triﬂes.
the prince. History conﬁrms only too well the truth you have uttered.
After the Romans had given in to the excesses of Luxury, they fell into
soft ways and their warrior virtues did not hold out for long. CAESAR


the prince and his confidant
791
understood only too well the effect of these effeminate morals. At the
battle of Pharsala,4 he ordered his Soldiers to strike the enemy in the
face. What was in his mind regarding the youth of the city, who were
ﬁghting under POMPEY’s orders? Soft living had not yet been able to
extinguish the courage of these young Romans. It had sufﬁcient inﬂu-
ence on them, though, to make them fear being disﬁgured even more
than death itself.
the count. I too have often seen in our Armies that discomfort, tired-
ness, and inclement weather spread an almost general despondency and
discouragement among the men that the sight of the greaterdangershad
not been able to undermine. Our Warriors scorn death in battle and on
the march, but cannot bear the loss of their equipment.
the prince. Ah! I see the reason for that. Honor places upon them the
obligation to face danger bravely, and unfortunately it cannot shame
them for any effeminate posturing as unworthy of a Warrior, worseeven
than cowardice. Oh, Count! How impatient I am to eradicate the harm-
ful causes of such a shameful weakness! If I could only bring back the
times of manly and virtuous simplicity!
the count. You would certainly make the Nation more powerful,
more respectable toitsneighbors,moreredoubtabletoitsenemies.What
is more, you would even make our citizens happier. Allthesereﬁnements
of Luxury become essential for someone immersed in his own pleasure.
Their loss would torment him, but their enjoyment does not make him
happy. Consider these things, the air of laziness, of boredom and dis-
gust, that nearly always can be discerned in the so-called fortunates of
the century.
the prince. What am I waiting for to take action? I want to begin my
Reign with such a salutary reform.
4. [[Julius Caesar defeated General Gnaeus Pompey, his fellow member of the
Triumvirate and the Roman consul, in 48b.c.at Pharsala,theancientcityof Thessaly
in northeastern Greece.]]


792
additional essays
the count. This enthusiasm is all to the good and is worthy of ad-
miration and of praise! I have no fear of a little vivacity even when en-
gaged in an undertaking where one has to proceed with measured tread.
I understand your prudence.
the prince. Quite right, Count. I sense that this work will take time,
prudence, and appropriate and well-managed measures. Help me to
carry it through. You have excited me against luxury. I am asking for
your advice in the war that I am going to declare upon it.
the count. You have convinced me, my Prince,thatyouwanttoattack
this enemy with all the application humanity demands. You intend to
put down its tyranny without upsetting its unfortunate victims,without
reducing to penury those who perpetuate its existence. When Luxury
has put down so many deep roots in a Kingdom, it becomes a deep-
seated illness that must be givenpropertreatment.Toostrongamedicine
will send the ailing body into dangerous convulsions. We are talking
about an illness that has several causes and several symptoms, each one
of which has to be treated with the appropriate remedy.
the prince. I can, for example, forbid a particular product, anything
that Luxury draws from abroad. Nothing prevents me from disallowing
its use.
the count. I see no objections to such a wise move. In that way, you
could save for the Kingdom all the money that those foreign goods lose
us. There is another area of Luxury that you could remove without dif-
ﬁculty, and by a single authoritative act that would be remarkably easy
to enforce. I am speaking about the inordinate number of useless ser-
vants whom people employ merely for show. Nothing prevents your de-
livering us from this vain and ruinous extravagance. Fix the number of
lackeys or other domestic servants people are allowed to employ, in ac-
cordance with their rank, and you will stop them from drawing on
ploughboys or men from the army. Those of your subjects who are the
most healthy and robust will no longer be enticed into lives of idleness
and corruption through service in the houses of the rich and powerful.
the prince and his confidant
793
the prince. Would it not be easy to destroy luxury in all its manifes-
tations! But I would be somewhat uneasy about laying down a limit on
everybody’s expenditure for the table, furniture, or clothes.
the count. Nothing could be truer, Prince, and you would have to
determine how far to go in this regard. I can hardly advise you how to
proceed with such Orders in Council. Sumptuary Laws are convenient,
essential inasmallStateandespeciallyinaRepublic.InalargeKingdom,
however, or in the situation where we ﬁnd ourselves, you will cause a
sort of revolution by ﬁercely attacking all these triﬂes to which men are
so attached. There are more subtle, indirect ways more suited to circum-
stances and that I believe are more effective in their results. I place your
own example at the top of the list. If a populace has, over a long period
of time, been accustomed to follow the example of their Masters, to
ﬂatter them and imitate them, should you not wait until the Nation’s
eyes and hearts are turned toward you? “Our Kings,” Montaigne wrote,
“can do what they please in such external reformations;theirowninclination
stands in this case for a law. Quidquid Principes faciunt, praecipere viden-
tur. 5 Whatever is done at court, passes for a rule throughout the rest of
France.” 6 If your Courtiers see for themselves that the excessesof Luxury
and frivolity displease you, one will no longer see them ruin themselves
throughtrivialities.Unconsciously,theywillbringthemselvesbackwithin
the bounds of reason and decency. They will set the tone for the Nobility,
and the leading citizens and all the nation will soon follow their lead.
the prince. It was excellent in the olden days when the Nobility and
themosteminentinthekingdomaloneheldpositionswherepeopletook
notice of them. Today, the country is full of these new men who, while
5. [[“What princes themselves do, they seem to prescribe.” Quintilian, Decla-
mationes, 3.]]
6. Essays, Book I, Chap. XLIII. [[Vattel was using Les essais de Michel de Mon-
taigne, nouvelle edition, London, 1724, 3 vols. Montaigne’s essay “Des lois somptu-
aires” (“Of Sumptuary Laws”) contained a critique of the dangerous inﬂuenceof the
frivolous manners of the French court (Montaigne’s Essays in Three Books, trans.
Charles Cotton, London, 1743, 325–28).]]


794
additional essays
not being admitted to Court, spread a contagious luxury in the cities,
mainly in the capital.
the count. It is a good thing that you know about such abuses and
that you are aware of their consequences.
the prince. Of course I know about them, Count, and I know the
remedy. I will cut off the source of these quick-made fortunes, and I
willdeliver my peoplefromthesemenwhotogetherbecometheirtyrants
and corruptors.
the count. Oh, Prince, how you have ﬁlled one faithful Subject with
joy. In one single stroke, through such a necessary reform in the admin-
istration of your ﬁnances, you will be giving a new face to this ﬁne King-
dom. We shall no longer see useless limbs bloated with blood and foul-
ness whilst the rest of the body perishes from exhaustion. Wealth will
circulate afar in a wider and more sustained manner. Honest abundance
will be come from the fruits of our labors, and it will circulate with an
equality that conforms to the good of the State, just as it does to justice
and common humanity.
the prince. I can appreciate what the followers concerned with the
favorites of PLUTUS7tellme,thatopulentﬁnanciersareanever-present
resource to meet the pressing needs of the State. A vain attraction, ca-
pable of dazzling only the poorest eyesight! Is not money distributed
more equally always in the hands of the citizens themselves? I would no
longer need large amounts. It will ﬂow into my Coffers in abundance
when the needs of State demand it. I am conﬁdent of being able to
provide all I need even during the most trying times when I govern a
rich and happy People with wisdom.
the count. I do not doubt it, Prince. You will win the conﬁdence and
the hearts of your Subjects. They will happily give you all you demand
of them for their defense, and you are going to put them into a position
where they can satisfy your needs.
7. [[God of wealth and money in Greek mythology.]]

the prince and his confidant
795
the prince. Of course, I want to provide them with all the necessities
of life. I sense that in order to secure a comfortable state for them they
must refrain from delivering themselves up toruinousfantasiesandfrom
seeking out trivialities that nowise bring them happiness. Here is a very
important point for the success of my undertaking. We must mark out
the real limits of Luxury and clearly indicate the expenditure that is to
be permitted and what we will agree not to forbid. I would not want to
reduce my Subjects to petty meanness, force the rich to live as if they
were poor, and snuff out the arts and industry.
the count. I had not counted on pushing the reform that far. A great
and rich Kingdom should not present itself as a poor State. Such aus-
terity would perhaps not be entirely ﬁtting and might prove to be a dan-
gerous introductioninto astate.Praiseworthymagniﬁcenceisacceptable
when it does not exceed the means of those who indulge in it. The tastes
of rich people for truly beautiful things, for the best of the arts, can only
be beneﬁcial to the Kingdom. They galvanize industry, and excitegenius
and talent. Far from your opposing these tastes, expand them yourself,
by protecting the Fine Arts so that they serve to heighten the luster of
your grandeur. Ensure that they convey a lofty impression of us to the
whole world. The magniﬁcence of our public buildings, for example,
sits well upon a powerful Nation. They will imbue theStatewithesteem,
gain the respect of foreigners, and contribute to the majesty of theState.
The Great will imitate you according to their means, and all the Citizens
will follow suit in proportion to their rank. Take care that when men’s
inclinations turn them toward praiseworthy undertakings, they are not
acting out of fear. The form and effects of their tastes will continue to
be characterized by wisdom and solidity.
the prince. It has to be done if I am to achieve fully and without
opposition my goal of drawing men away from frivolity, and inspiring
them to seek wise and wholesome pursuits.
the count. You have reached the second matter I wanted to put to
you, Prince, and which together should serve as a means of destroying
Luxury and set a limit on the kinds of magniﬁcence that can be admit-


796
additional essays
ted. Regulate the tastes of your subjects and everything will follow. To
regulate their tastes, givethema ﬁne education.Thisisthesoundestbasis
of all good order in a State, the fecund source of its advantages, which
lead in turn to its success. Just as a poor education is the polluted source
from which all public misfortunes ﬂow. I tremble when thinking about
the effect that the present system has upon young people of quality to-
day. What can you expect from a young man who has been fed on and
molded by frivolity, who has sought after pleasures, is taken with elegant
dress, and concerned with how he looks and with cultivating effeminate
manners. Far from becoming embarrassed, he derives all his glory from
these miserable things. He calls it “good manners,” and he looks down on
anyone who is not able to be, or who does not want to be, as frivolous
as he is. It gives me no joy to say this, and I do not make anyexaggeration
in stating that these “good manners” will lead a powerful state to its ruin.
“These are superﬁcial errors,” said MONTAIGNE,8 and warned us“but
they are of ill augury, and enough to inform us that the whole fabric is
crazy and tottering, when we see the roughcast of our walls to cleaveand
split.”
the prince. I promise you, my dear Count, that I will begin by ban-
ning these so-called “good manners” at my Court. The breath of con-
tempt will soon make these puerilities vanish into thin air. And as a re-
sult, the ambition of the Fathers will answer me through the education
that they provide for their children. I will let it be known far and wide
that throughout the course of my reign, no one will be able to aspire to
any position unless he has made himself capable of ﬁlling it.
the count. May you enjoy a long reign over a nation that you will
make glorious! You will make it happy, and you will not fail to be happy
yourself.
the prince. You are my lucky augur, my dear Count. The ﬁrst words
I have heard since ascending the Throne are those from a faithful Ser-
vant. May Heaven grant that I never listen to any others.
8. Ibid. See at the end. [[Montaigne’s “Des lois somptuaires” (“Of Sumptuary
Laws”), Montaigne’s Essays, trans. Charles Cotton (London, 1743), 327.]]


797
Biographical Sketches of Authors
Referred to by Vattel
Ammianus Marcellinus (a.d. 330–95): A Greek from Antioch, Ammi-
anus served as a soldier in the Roman army. He later wrote a history of Rome
and on “civilitas,” the moral and institutional restraints that an emperor
ought to observe. His work Res gestae libri was published in thirty-one vol-
umes, of which only the last eighteen survive.
Anson, George (1697–1762): First Baron Anson, admiral and naval re-
former, appointed First Lord of the Admiralty in 1757. He is notable for his
work A Voyage Round the World (1748), in which he recounted hisexperiences
circumnavigating the globe.
Appian (or Appianus) (a.d. ca. 95–ca. 165): Known as Appian of Alexandria,
he earned recognition for his rhetorical skills in pleading cases in Rome and
was appointed Procurator Augusti of Egypt in 147. He wrote Roman History
in twenty-four books, of which thirteen survive. His work gives accounts of
various peoples and countries up to their incorporation into the Roman
Empire.
Aristotle (384–322 b.c.): Greek philosopher, polymath, and student of
Plato, he wrote on everything from anatomy to rhetoric. His major works—
Physics, Metaphysics, On the Soul, Politics, Nicomachean Ethics, Rhetoric, and
On the Heavens—have had a long-lasting inﬂuence on the development of
every aspect of Western philosophical thought.
Arrian (L. Flavius Arrianus) (a.d. ca. 92–ca. 175): Of Greek origin, born in
Nicomedia (now Izmit, west Turkey), he was important in the Roman ad-
ministration and became proconsul of Baetica. He is best known forhiswork
as a historian; of his many books, his Anabasis Alexandri is the oldest-
surviving complete account of the campaigns of Alexander the Great.

798
biographical sketches
Augier de Marigny, Franc¸ois (1690–1762): French writer known for
the Histoire des Arabes (1750), which covers 636 years of the Islamic world,
from the ﬁrst successors of Mohammed in the seventh century to 1258 when
the last caliph was toppled from power by the Tartars. His work was based
on the writings of the Coptic bishop Severus.
Aulus Gellius (a.d. ca. 125–ca. 180): Studied grammar and rhetoric in
Rome and philosophy in Athens, eventually holding judicial ofﬁce in Rome.
HisworkNoctesAtticae, comprisingtwentybooks,wasintheformof a“com-
monplace” book, in which he noted things of interest, including notes on
grammar, geometry, philosophy, and conversations.
Bacallar y Sanna, Vicente (Marquis de San Felipe) (1669–1728): Span-
ish nobleman and author. His works included Me´moires pour servir a` l’histoire
d’Espagne sous le re`gne de Philippe V (1756) and Monarchia Hebrea (1745).
Bellay, Martin Du (1495–1559): Born in Langey, France. Bellay’sworkLes
me´moires de Mess. M. Du Bellay was originally started by his older brother
Guillaume, who was a successful general and diplomat for Francis I. After
Guillaume’s death, Bellay incorporated his brother’s writing into his own to
form a single work.
Bernard, Jacques (1658–1718): Born in Nions, Dauphine´, Bernard was a
French theologian trained at Geneva. After preaching reformed doctrines in
France, he left for Gouda in the 1680s, where he became pensionaryminister.
His Abre´ge´ de l’histoire de l’Europe appeared monthly between 1686 and 1688;
it was followed by Lettres historiques (1692–98) and his continuation of
Bayle’s Nouvelles de la re´publique des lettres (1699–1710, 1716–18). From 1705
he was minister of the Walloon Church at Leiden.
Bilain, Antoine (d. 1672): French jurist who wrote on French foreignpol-
icy. His books presented legal arguments in support of Louis XIV’s claims
against neighboring powers.
Bodin, Jean (1530–96): Born in Angers, France. Bodin was a jurist, natural
law philosopher, and advocate of free trade. Part of the circle of the Duc
d’Alenc¸on, he also served as a delegate in the Third Estate of the Estates-
General, working with D’Hoˆpital advocating religious tolerance between ex-
tremist Protestants and Catholics. He wrote La de´monomanie des sorciers
(1580), but it is his book of political theory, Six livres de la Re´publique (1576),
on the nature of sovereignty, that established his reputation.


biographical sketches
799
Boizard, Jean: Early eighteenth-century writer about whom little is
known, except that he was the royal treasurer for a time in France. His book
Traite´ des monnoyes (1714) explains monetary systems, ﬁnancial terms, the
variety of forms of money, and how money is made.
Bontekoe, Willem (1587–1657): Born in Hoorn, Holland, Bontekoe was
a boat captain in the Dutch East India Company who compiled a journal of
his eventful journey to Sumatra. His story, Voyages of the Dutch to the East-
Indies (1646), recounted shipwrecks and adventure on the high seas and be-
came a best-seller, going through many editions in the seventeenth and eigh-
teenth centuries.
Bougeant, Guillaume Hyacinthe (1690–1743): Born in Quimper,
Brittany, he became a Jesuit priest and taught classics at the Colleges of Caen
and Nevers. His work Amusement philosophique sur le langage des beˆtes (1737)
caused his exile from Paris. However, his historical works on the ThirtyYears’
War and on the Treaty of Westphalia reestablished his reputation. His three
comedies in which he satirized Jansenists were widely translated.
Bourbon Conde´, Anne Genevie`ve de (1619–79): The only daughter
of Henry II, prince of Conde´, she moved in court circles and was involved
in the factional religious politics of the day. She instigatedtheﬁrstandsecond
Frondes and was a lifelong enemy of Mazarin. An avowed Jansenist, she gave
up court life in 1653 and retired to a convent in Port Royal. She wrote Abre´ge´
du memoire de Madame la Duchesse de Longueville.
Buddeus [Budaeus], Johann Franz (1667–1729): Born in Anklam, Pom-
erania.GermanLutherantheologian,professorof GreekandLatinatCoburg
(1692), professor of moral philosophy at Halle (1693), and professor of the-
ology at Jena (1705). His writings most commented-upon acrossEuropewere
Historia juris naturae et synopsis juris naturae et gentium iuxta disciplinam He-
braeorum (1695) and Elementa philosophiae practicae (1697).
Bullinger, Heinrich (1504–75): One of the key ﬁgures of the Refor-
mation in Zurich and a close ally of Zwingli, whom he succeeded in 1531 as
head of the Zurich congregation. Bullinger published widely, including his-
tories of the Reform (1564), the Swiss Confederation (1568), and Zurich
(1573–74).
Bynkershoek, Cornelius van (1673–1743): Born in Holland. Writer on
international maritime law, publishing De dominio maris in 1702. He also


800
biographical sketches
wrote on and specialized in diplomatic rights and public law and proposed
the “three-mile limit rule,” which stated that a nation may claim sovereignty
over a territorial distance of three miles from shore, roughly the distance a
cannon could then shoot.
Caesar (Gaius Julius Caesar) (100–44 b.c.): Roman political and military
leader who played a key role in changing the Roman Republicintoanempire,
an act which famously precipitated his murder. He wrote several memoirs of
his different successful military campaigns, including De bello Africo, Debello
Alexandrino, and De bello Gallico.
Callie`res, Franc¸ois de (1645–1717): Born in Thorigny, France, Callie`res
was sieur de Rochelay et de Gigny and private secretary to Louis XIV, as well
as a diplomat and man of letters. A member of the Acade´mie Franc¸aise, he
published eight books, including De la manie`re de ne´gocier avec les souverains
(1716), which was considered a preeminent guide to diplomacy.
Camden, William (1551–1623): English antiquarian, archaeologist, and
headmaster of Westminster School. He wrote Britannia, the ﬁrst compre-
hensive, county-by-county topographical survey of Great Britain, and An-
nales rerum gestarum Anglicarum et Hibernicarum regnante Elizabetha (1615),
a detailed historical account of the reign of Elizabeth I.
Campanella, Tommaso (1568–1639): Born in Calabria in southern Italy,
Campanella became a Dominican monk in 1583. He was well known for his
heterodox theological beliefs and radical political views. His opposition to
Spanish rule in Italy led to a life of intermittent imprisonment. His most
famous work, La citta` del sole, written during imprisonment, was published
in Italian in 1602 and in Latin as Civitas solis in 1623.
Champier, Symphorien (1471–1538): Born in Lyons, France. Doctor of
medicine and cofounder of the College of the Doctorsof LyonwithFranc¸ois
Rabelais. Categorie medicinales, on the logic of medical analysis and argu-
mentation, is the best known of his many works.
Charlevoix, Pierre Franc¸ois Xavier (1682–1761): Born in St. Quen-
tin,France, CharlevoixwasaJesuitteacherandexplorerwhowrotechronicles
of his traveling adventures. His work Histoire et descriptionge´ne´raledelaNou-
velle France was among the earliest written descriptions of North America.
Chauvelin, Henri-Philippe (Abbe´) (1716–70): Little is known of Chau-
velin except that he was canon of Our Lady of Paris and adviser to the Par-


biographical sketches
801
lement of Paris. The lengthy title of his work translates as “Tradition of the
facts which express the system of independence that the Bishops opposed, in
the various centuries, with the invariable principles of the sovereign justice
of the king on all his subjects indistinctly; and need for letting act the secular
judges against their companies, to maintain the observation of the law, and
the public tranquillity.”
Chevalier, Nicolas (1650–1720): Little is known about him other than
that he wrote Histoire de Guillaume III, roi delaGrande Bretagne, abiography
of King William III of England.
Choisy, Franc¸ois Timole´on de (1644–1724): Born in Paris. An extrav-
agant cross-dresser and ﬂamboyant character in Louis XIV’s court who later
underwent a religious conversion, he was ordained and became the abbe´ of
Choisy. He was author of six historical and religious works, but it was his
Me´moires (1737), a salacious account of his years at court, that proved his
most popular publication.
Cicero (Marcus Tullius Cicero) (106–43 b.c.): Born in Arpinium, Italy. An
orator, statesman, political theorist, and philosopher of ancient Rome. He
wasfamousforhisskillfulprosecutionsincourt,forhisviewsontherhetorical
arts, and for deﬁning philosophy as an education in citizenship.
Commines, Philippe de (1447–1511): Flemish diplomat and writer who
served in the courts of Burgundy and France. In his Me´moires de Messire
Philippe Commines (1552), he analyzed the contemporary political scene with
the aim of instructing the reader in statecraft. He was an advocate of political
machination over military action.
Crevier, Jean Baptiste Louis (1693–1765): Born in Paris. Professor of
rhetoric at the College of Beauvais for twenty years. He produced major
works on Roman history, two editionsof Livy,andRhe´toriquefranc¸ais (1767).
Curtius Rufus, Quintus: First-century a.d. historian and the author of
Historiae Alexandri Magni, a biography of Alexander the Great in ten books
that focused on character rather than events.
Daniel, Gabriel (1649–1728): Born in Rouen, France. AJesuit,Danielwas
appointed historiographer of France by Louis XIV. Among philosophical,
theological, and historical treatises, he wrote the epic Histoire de France (1713)
in seventeen volumes, which was quickly translated into four languages.


802
biographical sketches
de la Vega, Garcilaso (1539–1616): Born in Cuzco, Peru. Although he
left Peru for Spain and was conscripted into military service at a young age,
his writings on Inca life, history, and subsequent Spanish conquest earned
him the sobriquet “El Inca.” He was the ﬁrst Spanish writer to sympathize
with the Inca plight.
Demosthenes (384–322 b.c.): Athenian orator and statesman. He was in-
strumental in his city’s uprising against Alexander the Great. Defeat forced
him into exile, where he took his own life. The corpus of his work that sur-
vives amounts to sixty-three texts, including manyof hispoliticalandjudicial
orations.
Diodorus Siculus (ca. 80–20 b.c.): Greek historian from Agyrium in Sic-
ily(hence “Siculus”)whosefortybooks,of whichonlyﬁfteensurvive,provide
a history of the world from mythical times to 60 b.c.
Duport du Tertre, Franc¸ois-Joachim (1716–59): Born in St. Malo,
France, he was a Jesuit priest and historical writer. He left the priesthood to
become an independent author and wrote the Abre´ge´ de l’histoire d’Angleterre
(1751) and Project utile pour le progre`s de la litte´rature (1756).
Etterlin, Peterman (d. 1509): Swiss chronicler and historian of Lucerne.
Served as a captain in the wars against Charles of Burgundy (1474–77).
Eutropius (a.d. ca. 320–ca. 390): A Roman, Eutropius held the ofﬁce of
secretary in Constantinople at the height of theByzantineera,workingunder
both Emperors Julian and Valens. His book Eurtopii breviarium ab urbe con-
dita is a ten-book compendium of the history of Rome.
Frederick II of Prussia (Frederick the Great) (1712–86): An “enlight-
ened despot” from the Hohenzollern dynasty, he was responsible for trans-
forming Prussia from a small kingdom into a European power through a
series of military conquests. He wrote several works, including Anti-
Machiavel (1739) and Instructions militaires du roi de Prusse pour ses ge´ne´raux
(1762).
Gramond, Gabriel-Barthe´lemy de (1590–1654): Born in Toulouse,
France. Little is known of this author except that he was a nobleman and
adviser to the president of the Parlement of Toulouse.
Grotius, Hugo (1583–1645): Born in Delft. A jurist in the Dutch republic,
a great and proliﬁc humanist scholar, an European diplomat, and an ecu-


biographical sketches
803
menical theologian. His works include De iure praedae (1605) and De jure
belli ac pacis (1625), by which he was seen to have laid the foundations of
international law, and De veritate religionis Christianae (1627).
Guicciardini, Francesco (1483–1540): Born in Florence, Italy. A states-
man and a political and historical writer, he worked for the Medici popes and
was appointed governor of Modena, Reggio, and Parma. Among his many
histories and political discourses, the History of Italy (Storia d’Italia) (1537–
40) established his reputation.
Heiss von Kogenheim, Johann: Of German origin. Although precise
details of his life are unknown, in the late seventeenth century he was the
resident historian at the court of Louis XIV.
Herodotus (ﬁfth century b.c.): Born in Halicarnassus, in Asia Minor.
Called the “Father of History” for his detailed account of the Greco-Persian
wars from 500 to 479 b.c.
Hobbes, Thomas (1588–1679): English philosopher and author of many
works concerning ethics, politics, history, and human nature, such as De cive
(1642), De corpore (1655), De homine (1658) and Questions Concerning Liberty,
Necessity, and Chance (1656). Leviathan (1651), his major work, cemented his
reputation, which has endured.
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus) (65–8 b.c.): Born in Venusia, Italy.
Leading Roman lyric poet and satirist in the time of Augustus. The themes
of his odes and epistles were love, friendship, and the pleasures of life. His
works included Satires (35–30 b.c.) Epodes (30 b.c.) and three books of Odes
(23 b.c.).
Joinville, Jean de (ca. 1224/5–1317): French nobleman from Champagne,
medieval historian, crusader, friend and servant of Louis IX, the French king
canonized in 1297. Joinville’s history of this king was completed in 1309 at
the request of the then queen, Jean of Navarre.
Justinian I (Flavius Petrus Sabbatius Justinianus) (a.d. 483–565): Known
as the last Roman Emperor, he was ruler of the Eastern Empire and isnotable
for his conquests and for re-taking Rome and the Western Empire from the
Ostrogoths. His lasting legacy was the great codiﬁcation of Roman law.
Lacombe, Jacques (1724–1811): French lawyer and author. His writingsin-
cluded histories of northern Europe and of Queen Christina.


804
biographical sketches
Lancelotti, Giovanni Paolo (1522–90): Italian jurist and historian.
La Pimpie Solignac, Pierre Joseph de (1687–1773): Little is known of
this French author except that he served on the staff of King Stanislas of
Poland. He wrote Les amours d’Horace (1728), which was an attempt to re-
create the life and times of Horace, and L’histoire ge´ne´rale de Pologne (1752).
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1646–1716): German philosopher and
polymath who served the house of Hanover as court counselor, diplomat,
librarian, and much else. Of his prodigious writings on virtually all areas of
philosophy, science, mathematics, technology, law, and history, only a few
were published in his lifetime, most importantly Essais de the´odice´e (1710).
Le Vassor, Michel (1646–1718): French Protestant, historian, andcriticof
Louis XIV. Through his various writings and membership in the circle of
Pierre Jurieu, he underscored the instability in the European state system
caused by aspirations to universal monarchy.
Livy (Titus Livius) 59 b.c.–a.d. 17): Born in Patavium, Italy. Historian and
historical interpreter on a grand scale, rejecting the contemporary method of
yearly chronological history. He focused instead on themes, such as public
morality, and on periods of thought, exempliﬁed by his epic work of Roman
history, comprising one hundred forty-three books.
Lucretius (Titus Lucretius Carus) (ca. 94–ca. 49 b.c.): Roman poet, phi-
losopher, and Epicurean. His poem De rerum natura was accredited with
inﬂuencing Virgil and naturalizing Greek philosophical ideas and discourse
in the Latin language.
Machiavelli, Nicolo` (1469–1527): Florentine political philosopher, mu-
sician, poet, and playwright. Famous for such works as The Prince (1505) and
Discourses on Livy (1519). Accused of justifying reason-of-state in politics, he
sought to show how republics could maintain themselves in early modern
Europe.
Mariana, Juan de (1536–1624): Born in Talavera, Spain. A Jesuit and a
Spanish historian whose work was noted for its accuracy and style. His major
work, Historiae de rebus Hispaniae (1592–1605), consisted of thirty books; his
other important work, De rege et regis institutione (1598), debated whether it
was lawful to overthrow a tyrant. He concluded that it was, which led to his
imprisonment by the Inquisition.


biographical sketches
805
Matthieu, Pierre (1563–1621): French historian and poet, popularizer of
Charron and Montaigne and chronicler of the history of the French court
and kingly life.
Me´zeray, Franc¸ois Eudes de (1610–83): Ofﬁcial historiographer of
France and in 1649 admitted to the Acade´mie Franc¸aise.Hewrotesummaries
of French and Latin chronicles in his three-volume Abre´ge´ chronologique
(1667).
Molesworth, Robert (First Viscount Molesworth) (1656–1725): Sup-
porter of William of Orange and a prominent member of the Irish Privy
Council, he was very much involved in the European political scene, which
he commented upon in his various writings.
Montaigne, Michel de (1533–92): Born near Bordeaux. French Renais-
sance scholar and statesman during the Wars of Religion. The ﬁrst edition
of his famous Essays was published in 1580 and a later edition in 1588.
Montesquieu, Charles-Louis de Secondat, Baron de La Bre`de
et de (1689–1755): Born near Bordeaux. French nobleman, magistrate, and
proliﬁc author. His Lettres persanes (1721) brought him to prominence in
European literary circles. His magisterial reﬂection on the nature of law and
the likely future of France, De l’esprit des lois (The Spirit of the Laws) (1748),
became one of the most inﬂuential works of the century.
Montgon, Charles Alexander de (1690–1770): The Abbe´ de Mont-
gon was a French diplomat and the secret agent of King Philippe V of Spain.
His Me´moires de M. l’Abbe´ de Montgon (1748–49) in ten volumes reveal his
machinations regarding the succession to the thrones of Spain and France
and his negotiations with Portugal. His duplicity was discovered and he was
condemned to exile. His memoirs proved a signiﬁcant source in European
diplomatic history.
Monthenault D’Egly, Charles Philippe de (1696–1749): Wrote
Histoire des rois des deux Siciles (1741).
Nevers, Louis de Gonzage, Duc de (1539–95): Leading French Cath-
olic soldier in the Wars of Religion, whose memoirs related his experiences
in battle.
Noel, Alexandre (also Natalis Alexander) (1630–1724): Born in Rouen,
France. Dominican priest and professor of theology, he lectured on theology,


806
biographical sketches
philosophy, and ecclesiastical law at the Sorbonne before becoming arch-
bishop of Rouen. He was a Thomist and his writings, Selecta historiae eccle-
siasticae capita (1676–86) in twenty-six volumes and Selecta historiae veteris
testamenti (1689), comprised a pioneering study of comparative religion.
Ockley, Simon (1678–1720): Born in Exeter, England. OckleywasaBritish
Orientalist and fellow of Jesus College Cambridge, where he lectured on Ar-
abic history. He translated many Arabic texts into English. His central work
was the two-volume Conquest of Syria, Persia, and Egypt by the Saracens
(1708–18).
Ossat, Arnauld d’ (1536–1604): Born in Gascony, France. Bishop of Ba-
yeux and a French diplomat, he played a major role in negotiating the rec-
onciliation of Henry IV in 1595 with the Holy See. He was named Conseiller
d’Etat in 1587 and served Henry IV in Italy.
Ovid (Publius Ovidius Naso) (43 b.c.–a.d. 17): Born in Sulmonia, Italy.
Roman poet who wrote about love and mythology. His themes andstylewere
inﬂuential in art and literature throughout the Renaissance. Much of his
work has survived, such as Amores (10 b.c.) in ﬁve volumes and Heroides (5
b.c.), consisting of twenty-one letters. Metamorphoses (a.d. 8),describingthe
creation and history of the world, remains his most famous work.
Papon, Jean (1507–90): Lieutenant general of Ballifs de Forez.
Pas, Antoine de (Marquis de Feuquieres) (1648–1711): An important ﬁg-
ure in the French military. His Me´moires sur la guerre (1730) recounted his
battle experiences serving Louis XIV.
Pecquet, Antoine (1704–62): Held the position “premier commis” in the
French ministry of Foreign Affairs during the reign of King Louis XV. He
wrote Discours sur l’art de ne´gocier (1737), later published asDel’artdene´gocier
avec les souverains, par M. Pecquet (1738).
Pineau-Duclos, Charles (1704–72): French biographerandnovelist.He
was secretary of the Acade´mie Franc¸ais and succeeded Voltaire as the ofﬁcial
historiographer of France.
Pliny the Younger (Gaius Plinius Caecilius Secundus) (a.d. ca. 63–
ca. 113): Born in Comum, Italy. Roman magistrate serving as senator, quaes-
tor, tribune, praetor, consul, augur, and ambassador between a.d. 81 and a.d.
110. Hisnumerous letters(Epistulae)describedRomanlifeintheﬁrstcentury.

biographical sketches
807
Plumard de Danguel, Louis-Joseph (John Nickolls, pseud.) (1722–
77): Born in Mans, France, de Danguel was a political economist whoseessay
Remarques sur les avantages et les de´savantages de la France et de la Gr. Bretagne
(1754) was a comparative study of the condition of workers, agriculture,tax-
ation, and the ﬁshing industry.
Plutarch (Mestrius Plutarchus) (a.d. 40–ca. 120): Born in Chaeronea,
Greece. Biographer and essay writer as well as an ambassador for Chaeronea
at Rome. In total he wrote forty-four biographies and seventy-eight works
on moral, political, philosophical, and scientiﬁc topics in essay or dialogue
form.
Polybius (ca. 200–118 b.c.): Born in Megalopolis. An ofﬁcer of theAchaean
League, he is considered reliable as a historian because of his presence at the
destruction of both Carthage and Corinth. In Rome at the end of the Punic
Wars, he wrote the Histories, comprising forty books, in which he attempted
to trace the causes of the rise of Rome and the Mediterranean world from
220 to 146 b.c.
Pre´vost, Antoine Franc¸ois (Abbe Pre´vost) (1697–1763): Born in Hes-
din, Artois. Pre´vost served as Jesuit priest for many years before leaving the
church and ﬂeeing to London and Utrecht. These experiences formed the
basis of his Me´moires et aventures d’un homme de qualite´ (1728) and Le phi-
losophe Anglais (1731), the seventh volume of which became the novel Manon
Lescault (1731), which was forbidden in France as a scandalous work.
Pufendorf, Samuel (1632–94): Born in Chemnitz, Saxony. A German ju-
rist and historian, he was seen, along with Grotius, as one of the major voices
in deﬁning natural law and jurisprudence in the late seventeenth and eigh-
teenth centuries. While a professor at Heidelberg, he introduced natural and
civil law into the curriculum. He also served Charles XI of Sweden and the
elector of Brandenburg.
Quintilian (Marcus Fabius Quintilianus) (a.d. ca. 40–ca. 96): Born inCa-
lahorra, Spain. The ﬁrst professor of any subject to hold an ofﬁcial appoint-
ment in Rome. In his Institutio oratoria he described how to train men for
leadership and what qualities they should possess, advocatingtheimportance
of rhetoric and education.
Rebmann, Hans (or Johann ) Rudolf (1566–1605): Born in Bern, Swit-
zerland. Rebmann was a poet noted for writing in the German vernacular.


808
biographical sketches
Rohan, Henri, Duc de (1579–1638): Born in Blain, Brittany. A favorite
of Henry IV, he made his name as a soldierandleaderof theHuguenotforces
and died after being wounded in battle. He wrote Le parfait capitaine (1631)
and Traite´ du gouvernement des treize cantons (1630s) in which he applied the
lessons of Caesar’s military tactics to contemporary warfare.
Schodeler, Wernher (1490–1541): Born in Bremgarten (Bern), Switzer-
land. Little is known about him except that he was a town clerk who spent
much of his time writing the Eidgenno¨ssische Chronik, an illuminatedchron-
icle of Switzerland. It was published ca. 1535, six years before he died of the
plague.
Selden, John (1584–1654): Born in West Tarring, Sussex. Scholar, jurist,
and legal antiquary who studied law and became keeper of records at the
Inner Temple and a member of Parliament. His variousworksincludedTitles
of Honour (1614), De diis Syris (1617), History of Tithes (1618), Mare clausum
(1618)—a rejection of Grotius’s Mare Liberum concerning sovereigntyof the
sea—and De jure naturali et gentium juxta disciplinam Ebraerorum (1640).
Seneca (Lucius Annaeus Seneca) (ca. 4 b.c.–a.d. 65): Born in Cordova,
Spain. Undogmatic Stoic and polymath, politician and courtier, eventually
tutor of Nero. He was forced to commit suicide at the age of seventy after
falling from Nero’s favor. His extensive oeuvre comprises essays on ethicsand
natural phenomena, as well as nine tragedies.
Sextus Aurelius Victor (a.d. ca. 320–90): Little is known about his life
except that he was prefect of the Roman province of Pannonia Secunda,
present-daySerbia,Bosnia,andCroatia.Fourworksthathavebeenpublished
together as Historia Romana have been ascribed to him, although his au-
thorship remains contested.
Sharaf Ad-Din ÛAli Yazdi (d. 1454): A Persian historian from Yazd, in
Samarkand. He was well known to Sha¯h Rokh Mirza, who was the fourth
son of Tamerlane and the ruler of Central Asia. His main work was The
History of Timur-Bec, Known by the Name of Tamerlain the Great (London,
1723).
Simler, Josias (1530–76): Born in Kappel, Switzerland. A Swiss theologian
and classicist, Simler was professor of theology in Zu¨rich andpennedtheﬁrst
known study of the Alps in De Alpibus commentarius (ca. 1574). His De Hel-
vetorium republica (1576) focused on Swiss constitutional issues.


biographical sketches
809
Socrates (ca. 470–399 b.c.): Athenian philosopher and teacher. Socrates
served as a soldier in the Peloponnesian War and was later appointed to the
Athenian Assembly. His life and writings are known through the works of
Plato, Aristotle, and Xenophon, among others.
Solı´s y Rivadeneira, Antonio de (1610–86): Born in Alcala de Hena-
res, Spain. Dramatist, poet, and historian of the conquest of Mexico. His
Historia de la conquista de Me´xico (1686) covered the initial journey of Juan
de Grijalva in 1518 to Cortes’s defeat of Montezuma in 1520. His work cele-
brated the achievements of the conquistadors.
Stettler, Michael (1580–1642): Citizen of Bern and one of the most in-
ﬂuential historians in seventeenth-century Switzerland. His works included
the famous Chronikon oder Grundliche Beschreibung der fu¨rnembsten Ge-
schichte und Thaten.
Stumpf, Johannes (1500–78): Originally from Bruchsal, in Germany, he
studied at Heidelberg. Stumpf converted to Protestantism during the early
1520s and became an ally and close friend of Zwingli.
Sully, Maximilien de Be´thune, Duc de (1560–1641): Born in Rosny.
French Protestant and nobleman who fought in the Wars of Religion before
serving Henry IV in numerous ofﬁces, becoming well known for fostering
agriculture and commerce. His famous Me´moires were published in 1638,
with additional volumes appearing posthumously in 1662.
Tacitus (Publius Cornelius Tacitus) (ca. a.d. 55–117): Roman orator and
historian of imperial Rome, he became prefect consul under Nerva in 97.
His Annals and Histories examined the reigns of Tiberius, Claudius, and
Nero.
Tertullian (Florens Quintus Septimius Tertullianus) (a.d. ca. 155–230):
Born in Carthage. He was the ﬁrst notable Latin theological thinker of early
Christianity and a church leader, whose work later inﬂuenced St. Thomas
Aquinas. Known as the “Father of the Latin Church,”heintroducedtheterm
“Trinity” into Christian eschatology. His many works included De testimonio
animae, De monogamia, De patientia, and De spectaculis, which were polem-
ical, moral, and ascetic treatises.
Thou, Jacques Auguste de (1553–1617): French historian who moved in
the court circles of Henry III. He was appointed “pre´sident a` mortier” in


810
biographical sketches
1596 and was instrumental in negotiating the Edict of Nantes with the Prot-
estants. He later replaced Sully in the Conseil des Finances. His Historia sui
temporis (1620), in eighteen books, focused on the history of his own time,
especially the Wars of Religion.
Thucydides (ca. 454–399 b.c.): Born in Athens. His unﬁnished History of
the Peloponnesian War, comprising eight books, became famous as the earliest
survivingworkof contemporaryhistorythatwasfactualandavowedlydevoid
of mythical and religious inspiration.
Tribbechov, Adam (1641–87): Born in Lu¨beck, Germany. German theo-
logian. Professor of moral philosophy, then of history, at the new University
of Kiel, later church administrator in Gotha. His writings included De phi-
losophia morum inter barbaros praecipue orientales (1666) and De doctoribus
scholasticis et corrupta per eos divinarum humanarumque rerum scientia (1665).
Tschudi, Aegidius (also Giles) (1505–72): Born in Glarus, Switzerland.
He devoted himself to the Counter-Reformation, using hisauthorityaschief
magistrate. He is better known as a historian of the Swiss Confederation,
although his work was published posthumously. Beschreibung Galliae Co-
matae (1758) was a topographical, historical, and antiquarian description of
ancient Helvetia; his major work, Chronicon helveticorum (1734–36), related
Swiss history from 1001 to 1470.
Turretini [Turretin] [Turretinus], Franc¸ois (1623–87): Born in Geneva
of Italian descent. Pastor of the Italian church at Geneva, where he used his
position to redeﬁne Calvinist orthodoxy. He was appointed professor of the-
ology in 1653, and his polemic Institutio theologiae elencticae in three parts
(1679–85) was used as a standard text in Reformed circles.
Valerius Maximus: Early-ﬁrst-century Roman author. Little is known
about him except that he was a professional rhetorician. His book Factorum
et dictorum memorabilium, dedicated to Tiberius, was a collection of anec-
dotes and miscellany about Roman history for the use of orators.
Varro, Marcus Terentius (116–27 b.c.): Born in Rieti, Italy. A Roman
scholar, writer, and supporter of Pompey in the civil wars of the Triumvirate,
reaching the ofﬁces of tribune and then praetor. After Pompey’s defeat he
was granted a pardon byCaesar andin47b.c.wasappointedtorunthepublic
library planned by Caesar. He wrote hundreds of works, of which only two


biographical sketches
811
survive, De Lingua Latina in twenty-ﬁve books and Rerum rusticarum
libri III, on agricultural topics.
Velly, Paul Franc¸ois (Abbe´) (1709–59): Proliﬁc French historian and
theological author.
Vertot, Rene´-Aubert de (1655–1735): Born in Benetot, Normandy. A
Capuchin abbe´ and proliﬁc historian with histories of, among other matters,
the Knights of Malta and the revolutions in Sweden and Portugal.
Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro) (70–19 b.c.): Born in Mantua, Italy. The
most famous of his works is the Aeneid, an epic poem on the history of
Rome comprising six books. Other works included the Eclogues and Georgics.
Vogel, Franz Adam (d. 1749): Born in Colmar. Lawyer and grand-juge of
the Swiss Guard stationed in France. Author of Code criminal de l’empereur
Charles V (1735).
Vopiscus, Flavius: In 59 b.c. he was tribune to the plebs and involvedwith
the factions against Cataline, becoming praetor in 54 b.c.
Wattenwyl (French spelling is Watteville), Alexander Ludwig von
(1714–81): Born in Berne, Switzerland, of a patrician family, Wattenwyl be-
came a magistrate and historian and was one of the ﬁrst to attempt a modern
history of the Swiss Confederation based on original source material. Be-
tween 1763 and 1766 Wattenwyl participated in the reform-orientedHelvetic
Society, where he defended anti-Rousseauian positions. Wattenwyl’s views
on Bernese constitutionalhistoryweresummarizedinhisposthumouslypub-
lished U¨ ber die Staatsverfassung der Stadt und Republik Bern (Schweizerisches
Museum, 1783). He was also the author of Histoire de la Confe´de´ration hel-
ve´tique (1754).
Wicquefort, Abraham de (1598–1682): Born in Amsterdam. A Dutch
diplomat to France, in 1675 Wicquefort was accused of high treason after
selling secret dispatches to the English ambassador. He escaped the death
penalty; however, all his goods were conﬁscated, and he was imprisoned in
Lowenstein, where he wrote The Embassador and His Functions (1716) about
his experiences.
Witt, Johan de (1625–72): Born in Dordrecht. In 1650 he became leader
of the deputation of Dordrecht to the States of Holland. He later ruled the
Republic of United Provinces and was assassinated by his enemies in the


812
biographical sketches
Orange party, whom he had opposed throughout his political career. He
wrote a book on mathematics, Elementa curvarum linearum (1659)andWaar-
dije van lyf-renten naer proportie van los-renten (1671), on political economy.
Wolff, Christian (1679–1754): Born in Breslau, Silesia. A German phi-
losopher and polymath, he composed a vast philosophical system compre-
hending all sciences, ﬁrst in German, then in Latin, and dominated philos-
ophy in Germany and beyond for decades in the middle of the eighteenth
century.
Xenophon (ca. 428–353 b.c.): Born in Ephesus. Soldier, mercenary, andhis-
torian. His history Hellenica focused on events of 411 to 362 b.c. Anabasis
(The Inland Expedition [of Cyrus]) is a record of his travels in the expedition
against the Persians and was used as a ﬁeld guide by Alexander the Great.


813
bibliography
Works Referred to by Vattel
collections
Canon in nona actione [Can. in nona actione], Corpus Iuris Canonici. In The
1917 or Pio-Benedictine Code of Canon Law in English Translation, edited
by Edward N. Peters. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2001.
Extravagantes communes [Extravag. Commun.]. In Corpus Iuris Canonici, ed-
ited by Emilius Ludwid Richter. Reprint of the 1879–81 edition. Graz,
1959.
Hardouin, Jean. Conciliorum collectio regia maxima. 12 vols. Paris, 1715.
other sources
Ammianus Marcellinus. Res gestae XXXI. In Ammianus Marcellinus, Roman
History III. Books 27–31. Excerpta Valesiana, translatedbyJ. C.Rolfe.Loeb
Classical Library no. 331. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1939.
Anonymous. Me´moires pour server a` l’histoire du differend entre le Pape et le
Canton de Lucerne. a` L***. Lucerne, 1727.
Anson, George. A Voyage Round the World [Anson’s Voyage Round the World ].
London, 1748. Modern edition, London: Oxford University Press, 1974.
Appian. De bello punico. In Appian, Roman History. Translated by Horace
White. 2 vols. Loeb Classical Library, nos. 2, 3. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1912.
Aristotle.Politics. TranslatedbyH.Rackham.LoebClassicalLibrary,no.264.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1932.
Arrian. Anabasis Alexandri I [de Exped. Alexand.]. In Arrian, The Anabasis
of Alexander 1–4, translated by P. A. Brunt and E. Iliff Robson. Loeb


814
bibliography
Classical Library, no. 236. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1929.
AugierdeMarigny,Franc¸ois.HistoiredesArabessouslegouvernementdescalifes
[Hist. of the Arabs]. Paris, 1750. Published in English as The History of the
Arabians, Under the Government of the Caliphs. London, 1758.
Aulus Gellius. Noctes Atticae III [Aul. Gell. Noct. Attic. lib. iii]. In Aulus
Gellius, Attic Nights, Books 1–5, translated by J. C. Rolfe. Loeb Classical
Library, no. 195. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1927.
Bacallar y Sanna, Vicente (Marquis de San Felipe). Me´moires pour servir a`
l’histoire d’Espagne sous le re`gne de Philippe V [Memoirs of M. de St.
Phillippe] [Memoirs of Mons. de St. Phillipe] [Memoirs of M. St. Phillip;
Memorial of the marquis de St. Philip]. Translated by Maudave. Paris,
1756. Published in English as Memoirs of Elizabeth Farnese. London,
1746.
Bellay, Martin Du. Les me´moires de Mess. M. Du Bellay [Memoirs of Martin
Du Bellay]. Paris, 1569. Modern edition, Me´moires de Martin etGuillaume
Du Bellay, edited by V. L. Bourrilly and F. Vindry. Paris: Renouard,
H. Laurens, succ., 1908–19.
Bernard,Jacques,ed.NouvellesdelaRe´publiquedesLettres. Amsterdam,1698–
1710.
Bilain, Antoine. Traite´ des droits de la reyne tres-chrestienne sur divers estats de
la Monarchie d’Espagne [A treatise on the right of the queen to several states
of the Spanish monarchy]. Paris, 1667.
Bodin [Bodinus], Jean.Six livresdelaRe´publique [Republic].Paris,1576.Pub-
lished in English in Jean Bodin, On Sovereignty. Edited and translated by
Julian H. Franklin. Cambridge Texts in the History of PoliticalThought.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Boizard, Jean. Traite´ des monnoyes, de leurs circonstances & de´pendances [Trea-
tise on Coin]. Paris, 1714.
Bontekoe, Willem. Journael ofte gedenckwaerdige beschrijvinge van de Oost-
Indische reyse van Willem Ysbrantsz Bontekoe [Voyages of the Dutch to the
East-Indies]. Hoorn, 1646. Published in English as MemorableDescription
of the East-Indian Voyage, 1618–25. Translated and edited by C. B. Bodde-
Hodgkinson and Pieter Geyl. London: Routledge, 1929.
Bougeant, Guillaume Hyacinthe. Histoire des guerres et des ne´gociations qui
pre´ce´de`rent le traite´ de Westphalie sous le re`gne de Louis XIII [History of the
Treaty of Westphalia]. Paris, 1751.
Bourbon Conde´, Anne Genevie`ve de. Abre´ge´ du Me´moire de Madame la Du-


bibliography
815
chesse de Longueville, contre Madame la Duchesse de Nemours, touchant la
compe´tence des trois Estats de Neuf-chastel. N.p., 1670–80.
Buddeus [Budaeus], Johann Franz. Elementa philosophiae practicae, instru-
mentalis et theoreticae [Elementa Philos. Pract.]. Magdeburg, 1697. Pub-
lished in English as Elements of Instrumental Philosophy. 1717.
Burke, William. An Account of the European Settlements in the Americas. Lon-
don, 1757.
Bynkershoek, Cornelius van. De foro legatorum liber singularis [Competent
Judge of Embassadors]. Leiden, 1721. Published in English as De foro le-
gatorum liber singularis—a monograph on the jurisdiction over ambassadors
in both civil and criminal cases. Translated by Gordon J. Laing. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1946.
Caesar. De bello Gallico. In Caesar, The Gallic Wars, translated by H. J. Ed-
wards. Loeb Classical Library, no. 72. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1917.
Callie`res, Franc¸ois de. De la manie`re de ne´gocier avec les souverains [Manner
of negotiating with Sovereigns]. Brussels, 1716. Published in English as The
Art of Negotiating with Sovereign Princes. London, 1716; On the Manner
of Negotiating with Princes. TranslatedbyA. F.Whyte.Washington,D.C.:
University Press of America, 1983.
Camden, William. Annales rerum Anglicarum et Hibernicarum,regnanteEliz-
abetha [Annal. Angl.]. London, 1615. Published in English as Annales, or,
the True and Royall History of the Famous Empresse Elizabeth Queene of
England, France, and Ireland [History of Queen Elizabeth]. London, 1625.
Excerpts published in William Camden,TheHistoryof theMostRenowned
and Victorious Princess Elizabeth, Late Queen of England. Chicago/Lon-
don: University of Chicago Press, 1970.
Campanella, Tommaso. Civitas solis (La citta` del sole). Frankfurt, 1623.
Champier, Symphorien. Les gestes, ensemble la vie du preulx chevalier Bayard
[Life]. Lyons, 1525. Modern edition edited by Denis Crouzet. Paris: Impr.
nationale, 1992.
Charlevoix, Pierre Franc¸ois Xavier. Histoire et description ge´ne´rale de la Nou-
velle France, avec le journal historique d’un voyage fait par ordre du roi dans
l’Ame´rique septentrionnale [History of New France]. Paris, 1744.
Chauvelin, Henri-Philippe (Abbe´). Tradition des faits, qui manifestent le sis-
te`me d’inde´pendance que les e´veˆques ont oppose´ dans les diffe´rens sie`cles aux
principes invariables de la justice souveraine du roi sur tous ses sujets indis-
tinctement; et la ne´cessite´ de laisser agir les juges se´culiers contre leurs entre-

816
bibliography
prises, pour maintenir l’observation des loix, et la tranquillite´publique. N.p.,
[1753].
Chevalier, Nicolas. Histoire de Guillaume III, roi de la Grande Bretagne. Am-
sterdam, 1692.
Choisy, Franc¸ois Timole´on de. Histoire de Charles Cinquie`me roi de France
[Choisy’s History of Charles V] [abbe´ de Choisy, Hist. de Charles V]. Paris,
1689.
———. Histoire de France sous les re`gnes de S. Louis, de Philippe de Valois, du
roi Jean, de Charles V., et de Charles VI [Choisy’s History of St. Louis].Paris,
1688–95.
Cicero. De divinatione [de Divinat.]. In Cicero, On Old Age. On Friendship.
On Divination, translated by W. A. Falconer. Loeb Classical Library, no.
154. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1923.
———. De inventione. In Cicero, On Invention. The Best Kind of Orator.
Topics, translatedbyH.M.Hubbell.LoebClassicalLibrary,no.386.Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1949.
———. De legibus [de Legib.]. In Cicero, On the Republic. On the Laws,
translated by Clinton W. Keynes. Loeb Classical Library, no. 213. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1928.
———. De natura Deorum [De Natura Deorum]. In Cicero, On the Nature
of Gods. Academics, translated by H. Rackham. Loeb Classical Library,
no. 268. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1933.
———. Fragment. Ex lib. ii De Republica. In Cicero, On the Republic. On
the Laws, translated by Clinton W. Keynes. Loeb Classical Library, no.
213. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1928.
———. De ofﬁciis III [De Ofﬁc.]. In Cicero, On Duties, translatedbyWalter
Miller. Loeb Classical Library, no. 30. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1913.
———. In Verrem I [Orat. i]. In Cicero, The Verrine Orations I: Against
Caecilius. Against Verres, translated by L. H. G. Greenwood. Loeb Clas-
sical Library, no. 221. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1928.
———. In Verrem I [Orat.ii, i.85].InCicero,TheVerrineOrationsII:Against
Verres, part 2, books 3–5, translated by L. H. G. Greenwood. Loeb Clas-
sical Library, no. 293. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1935.
———. Pro Caecina [Orat. pro Caecina]. In Cicero, Pro Lege Manilia. Pro
Caecina. Pro Cluentio. Pro Rabirio Perduellionis Reo, translated by
H. Grose Hodge. Loeb Classical Library, no. 198.Cambridge,Mass.:Har-
vard University Press, 1927.


bibliography
817
———. Pro Roscio Comoedo [Orat. pro Q. Roscio, comoedo]. In Cicero, Pro
Quinctio. Pro Roscio Amerino. Pro Roscio Comoedo. The Three Speeches
on the Agrarian Law Against Rullus. Translated by J. H. Freese. Loeb
Classical Library, no. 240. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UniversityPress,
1930.
———. Pro Sestio [Pro P. Sextio]. In Cicero, Pro Sestio. In Vatinium, trans-
lated by R. Gardner. Loeb Classical Library, no. 309. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1958.
———. Somnium Scipionis [Som. Scip.; De republica VI.xiii]. In Cicero, On
the Republic. On theLaws, translatedbyClintonW.Keynes.LoebClassical
Library, no. 213. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1928.
———. Tusculan Disputations [Tuscul.]. Translated by J. E. King. Loeb
Classical Library, no. 141. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1927.
Commines, Philippe de. Me´moires de Messire Philippe Commines [Memoires
of Commines]. Paris, 1552. Published in English as Memoirs of Philip de
Commines, Lord of Argenton. Praeger Series in War Studies. London,1991.
Crevier, Jean Baptiste Louis. Histoire des empereurs romains [History of the
Emperors]. Paris, 1750–56. Published in English as The History of the Ro-
man Emperors. Translated by John Mill. London, 1814.
Curtius Rufus, Quintus [Q. Curt.]. History of Alexander. [Quint. Curt.]. In
Quintus Curtius, History of Alexander, translated by J. C. Rolfe. 2 vols.
Loeb Classical Library, nos. 368, 369. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1946.
Daniel, Gabriel. Histoire de France [Father Daniel’s History of France] [Hist.
of France]. Paris, 1713. Published in English as The History of France. Lon-
don, 1726.
D’Egly, Charles Philippe de Monthenault. Histoire des rois des deux Siciles
[History of the Kings of the Two Sicilies] [History of the Two Sicilies]. Paris,
1741.
Demosthenes. Against Aristocrates [Orat. Adv. Aristocrat.]. In Demosthenes,
Against Meidias. Against Androtion. Against Aristocrates. Against Timocra-
tes. Against Aristogeiton 1 and 2 (21–26), translated by J. H. Vince. Loeb
Classical Library, no. 299. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1935.
Diodorus Siculus. Library of History. Vol. IX, books 18–19.65. Translated by
R. M. Geer. Loeb Classical Library, no. 377. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1947.


818
bibliography
Duport du Tertre, Franc¸ois-Joachim. Histoire des conjurations, conspirations
et re´volutions ce´le`bres [Conspiracies] [Du Port’s Hist. of Conspir.]. Paris,
1754.
Etterlin, Peterman. Kronica von der loblichen Eydtgnoschaft [Etterlin]. Basel,
1507. Reprint, Winterthur, 1978.
Eutropius. Eutropii breviarium ab urbe condita [Eutropius]. Published in En-
glish as The Breviarium ab urbe condita of Eutropius. Translated by H. W.
Bird. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1993.
Frederick II of Prussia. Memoirs of the House of Brandenburg. Translated by
M. Darget. London, 1748.
Gramond, Gabriel-Barthe´lemy de. Historiarum Galliae ab excessu Henrici IV
libri XVIII, quibus rerum per Gallos tota Europa gestarum accurata narratio
continetur, autore Gabr. Bartholomaeo Gramondo, . . . [Hist. Gall.]. Tolo-
sae: apud A. Colomerium, 1643.
Grotius, Hugo. Annales et historiae de rebus Belgicis [Ann.] [Annals of the
Netherlands] [Hist. of the Disturb. in the Netherlands] [Hist. of the Dis-
turbances in the Low Countries] [Hist. of the Disturbances in the Nether-
lands] [Hist. of Netherlands] [Hist. of the Troubles in the Low Countries]
[History of the Disturbances in the Low Countries] Amsterdam, 1657. Pub-
lished in English as De rebus belgicis, or, The Annals and History of theLow-
Countrey-Warrs. London, 1665.
———. The Free Sea [Mare Liberum]. Edited by D. Armitage.Indianapolis:
Liberty Fund, 2004.
———. The Rights of War and Peace, in Three Books: Wherein Are Explained,
the Law of Nature and Nations, and the Principal Points Relating to Gov-
ernment [De Jure Belli et Pacis] [Law of War and Peace]. Edited and trans-
lated by Jean Barbeyrac. London, 1738. Modern edition editedbyR.Tuck.
Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2005.
Guicciardini, Francesco. The History of Italy, from the Year 1490, to 1532 . . .
In twenty books. Translated into English by the Chevalier Austin Parke God-
dard. London, 1753–56.
Heiss von Kogenheim, Johann. Histoire de l’Empire [History of the Empire].
Paris, 1684. Published in English as History of the Empire. Translated by
Bourgeois de Chastenet. London, 1727–29.
Herodotus. The History of Herodotus. Translated by G. Rawlinson. 4 vols.
London: J. Murray, 1862.
Hobbes, Thomas. De Cive, or the Citizen [De Cive]. Published in English as
Thomas Hobbes, De Cive, or the Citizen—English Version. Edited by
HowardWarrender. ClarendonEditionof theWorksof ThomasHobbes.


bibliography
819
Oxford, 1984. Published in Latin as ThomasHobbes,DeCive—LatinVer-
sion. Edited by Howard Warrender. Clarendon Edition of the Works of
Thomas Hobbes. Oxford, 1984.
Horace. Carmina IV [Hor. lib. iv. od. 6]. In Horace, Odes and Epodes, trans-
lated by Niall Rudd. Loeb Classical Library, no. 33. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 2004.
———. Satires, Epistles. The Art of Poetry [Ars poetica]. Translated by
H. Rushton Fairclough. Loeb Classical Library, no. 33. New York: G. P.
Putnam, 1926.
Joinville, John de. Histoire de saint Louis, Credo et lettre a` Louis X. Accom-
pagne´ d’une traduction par M. Natalis de Wailly. Paris: Firmin-Didot,
1874.
Justinian I [Justin.]. Digests (Pandects) [Digest.]. In The Digest of Justinian,
translated by Alan Watson. Philadelphia:Universityof PhiladelphiaPress,
1997.
———. Institutes I [Instit. lib. i]. In The Institutes of Justinian: Text, Trans-
lation, and Commentary, edited and translated by J. A. C. Thomas. New
York: American Elsevier, 1975.
Lacombe, Jacques. Abre´ge´ chronologique de l´histoire du Nord [Histoire du
Nord ]. Paris, 1762.
Lancelotti, Giovanni Paolo (Johannis Pauli).Institutionesjuriscanonici:Cum
notis variorum, praecipue arcana dominationis papalis, episcopalis, et cleri-
calis in Ecclesia Romana detegentibus; In usum auditorii Thomasiani
[Thomas. Nat. ad Lancell.]. Halle, 1715–17.
La Pimpie Solignac, Pierre Joseph de. L’histoire ge´ne´rale de Pologne de Mr. de
Solignac [History of Poland ]. Paris, 1750.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm. Codex juris gentium diplomaticus. [Codex Juris
Gent. Diplomat.] [diplomatic code of the law of nations] [Leibnitii Codex
Juris Gent. Diplomat.] [diplomatic Code of the Law of Nations] [Leibnitii
Codex Juris Gent. Diplomat.] [Leibnitz, Cod. Jur. Gent. Diplomat.]. Han-
over, 1693.
Le Vassor, Michel. The History of King Lewis XIII [Hist. of Louis XIII ]. Lon-
don, 1700–1702.
Livy [Tit. Liv]. Ab urbe condita I. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 1–2, trans-
lated by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 114. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1919.
———. Ab urbe condita II. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 1–2, translated
by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 114. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1919.


820
bibliography
———. Ab urbe condita IV. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 3–4, translated
by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 133. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1922.
———. Ab urbe condita V. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 5–7, translatedby
B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 172. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1924.
———. Ab urbe condita VI. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 5–7, translated
by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 172. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1924.
———. Ab urbe condita VII. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 5–7, translated
by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 172. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1924.
———. Ab urbe condita VIII. In Livy,Historyof Rome,Books8–10, translated
by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 191. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1926.
———. Ab urbe condita IX. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 8–10, translated
by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 191. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1926.
———. Aburbe condita XXVIII. InLivy,Historyof Rome,Books28–30, trans-
lated by F. G. Moore. Loeb Classical Library, no. 381. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1949.
———. Ab urbe condita XXX. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 28–30, trans-
lated by F. G. Moore. Loeb Classical Library, no. 381. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1949.
———. Ab urbe condita XXXVIII. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 38–39,
translated by E. T. Sage. Loeb Classical Library, no. 313. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1936.
———. Ab urbe condita XLII. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 40–42, trans-
lated by E. T. Sage and A. C. Schlesinger. Loeb Classical Library, no. 332.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1938.
———. Epitom. lib. XVIII. In Livy, Summaries, Fragments, and Obsequens,
translated by A. C. Schlesinger. Loeb Classical Library, no. 404. London:
Heinemann, 1959.
Lucretius. De rerum natura [unreferenced]. In Lucretius, On the Nature of
Things, translated by W. H. D. Rouse, revised by Martin F. Smith. Loeb
Classical Library, no. 181, rev. ed. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1992.
Machiavelli, Nicolo`. Discorsi sopra la prima deca di Tito Livio [Disc. on Livy].


bibliography
821
1531. Published in English as Discourses on Livy. Translated by Harvey C.
Mansﬁeld and Nathan Tarcov. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,1996.
Mariana, Juan de. De rege et regis institutione [de Rege et Regis Institut.]. To-
ledo, 1599.
Matthieu, Pierre. Histoire de France sous les regnes de Franc¸ois I, Henri II,
Franc¸ois II, Charles IX, Henri III, Henri IV, and Louis XIII [Matthieuvol.
ii book 3]. 2 vols. Paris, 1631.
Me´zeray, Franc¸ois Eudes de. A General Chronological History of France [Hist.
of France] [History of France]. London, 1683.
Molesworth, Robert. Etat pre´sent du Danemark, par M. Molesworth, envoye´
d’Angleterre a` la Cour de Danemark [Present State of Denmark]. Amster-
dam: Jansons a` Waesberge, 1732.
Montaigne, Michel de. Les essais de Michel de Montaigne, nouvelle edition. 3
vols. London, 1724.
Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat, Baron de. The Spirit of the Laws [Spirit
of Laws].EditedbyA. M.Cohleretal.Cambridge:CambridgeUniversity
Press, 1989.
Montgon, CharlesAlexanderde.Me´moiresdeM.l’Abbe´deMontgon [Memoirs
of the abbe´ De Montgon]. Lausanne, 1748–49.
Nevers, LouisdeGonzage, Duc de.Les Me´moiresdeMonsieurleDucdeNevers
[Memoires de Nevers]. Paris, 1665.
Noell [Natalis], Alexandre. Historia ecclesiastica [Dissert. Hist. Eccl.] [Natal.
Alex. Dissert. Hist. Eccles.]. Paris, 1676.
Ockley, Simon. The Conquest of Syria, Persia, and Egypt by the Saracens [Al-
vakedi’s History of the Conquest of Syria]. London, 1708–18.
———. The History of the Saracens [History of the Saracens]. London, 1718.
Reprint, Whiteﬁsh, Mont.: Kessinger, 2003.
Ossat, Arnauld d’. Lettres de illustrissime et reverendissime Cardinale d’Ossat
[Letters of Cardinal d’Ossat]. Paris, 1624.
Ovid. Tristia I. In Ovid, Tristia. Ex Porto, translatedbyA. L.Wheeler,revised
by G. P. Gould. Loeb Classical Library, no. 151. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1988.
Papon, Jean. Recueil d’arrests notables des cours souveraines de France [Arreˆts
Notables]. Paris, 1565.
Pas, Antoine de, Marquis de Feuquie`res. Me´moires sur la guerre [Memoires de
Feuquieres]. [Paris?], 1730. Published in English as Memoirs Historicaland
Military. London, 1736.
Pecquet, Antoine. Discours sur l’art de ne´gocier. Paris, 1737.


822
bibliography
Pineau-Duclos, Charles. The History of King Louis XI, King of France. Lon-
don, 1746.
Pliny the Younger [Gaius Plinius Caecilius Secundus]. Epistulae [Ep. L]. In
Letters, I Books 1–7, translated by Betty Radice. Loeb Classical Library.
New York: Heinemann, 1969.
Plumard de Danguel, Louis-Joseph [John Nickolls, pseud.]. Remarques sur
les avantages et les de´savantages de la France et de la Gr. Bretagne, par rapport
au commerce. Leiden [Paris], 1754. Published in English as Remarks on the
Advantages and Disadvantages of France and Great-Britain with Respect to
Commerce. London, 1754.
Plutarch. Agesilaus [Life of Agesilau¨s]. In Plutarch, Agesilaus and Pompey. Pe-
lopidas and Marcellus, translated by Bernadotte Perrin. Loeb Classical Li-
brary, no. 87. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1917.
———. Demetrios [in Demetrio.]. In Plutarch, Demetrius and Antony. Pyr-
rhus and Gaius Marius [Plut. in Pyrr.], translated by Bernadotte Perrin.
Loeb Classical Library, no. 101. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1920.
———. Fabius [life of Fabius Maximus]. In Plutarch, Pericles and Fabius
Maximus. Nicias and Crassus, translated by Bernadotte Perrin. Loeb Clas-
sical Library, no. 65. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1916.
———. Publicola [in Poplicol.]. In Plutarch, Theseus and Romulus. Lycurgus
and Numa.Solon andPublicola, translatedbyBernadottePerrin.LoebClas-
sical Library, no. 46. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1914.
Polybius. Historiae III [Histor. lib. iii]. In Polybius, Histories Books 3–4,
translated by W. R. Paton. Loeb Classical Library, no. 137. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1922.
Pre´vost, Antoine Franc¸ois. Histoire ge´ne´rale des voyages, ou Nouvelle collection
de toutes les relations de voyages par mer et par terre qui onte´te´publie´esjusqu’a`
pre´sent dans les diffe´rentes langues. 20 vols. Paris, 1746–1801.
Pufendorf, Samuel. Les devoirs de l’homme et du citoien. 4th ed. Amsterdam,
1718. Modern English edition, The Whole Duty of Man, According to the
Law of Nature. Edited by I. Hunter and D. Saunders. Indianapolis: Lib-
erty Fund, 2003.
———. Of the Law of Nature and Nations [Law of Nature and Nations; De
jure naturae et gentium]. Edited by Jean Barbeyrac. Translated by Basil
Kennet. 4th ed. London, 1729. Reprint, Clark, N.J.: Lawbook Exchange,
2005.
Quintilian. Institutio Oratoria VII [Inst. Orat.] [Instit. Orat.]. In Quintilian,


bibliography
823
The Orator’s Education, Books 6–8, translated by Donald A. Russell. Loeb
Classical Library, no. 126. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
2002.
———. The Major Declamations Attributed to Quintilian [Declamations].
Translated by L. A. Sussman. Frankfurt am Main; New York: Verlag P.
Lang, 1987.
Rebmann, Hans Rudolf. Ein neuw, lustig, ernsthafft, poetisch Gastmal, vnd
Gespra¨ch zweyer Bergen, in der lo¨blichen Eydgnossschafft, vnd im Berner Ge-
biet gelegen . . . Bern, 1606.
Ricci, Pietro Andrea. Synopsis, decreta et resolutiones sac. congr. Immunitatis
super controversijs iurisdictionalibus complectens. [Synops. Decret. et Resol.S.
Congreg. Immunit.]. Praeneste: Typis Barberinis apud Antonium Ruzzo-
lum, 1708.
Rohan, Henri, Duc de. Me´moires du Duc de Rohan sur les choses qui se sont
passe´es en France depuis la mort de Henri le Grand jusqu’a` la Paix faite avec
les Re´forme´s [Memoires de Rohan]. [Paris?], 1644. Published in English as
The Memoires of the Duke of Rohan. Translated by George Bridges. Lon-
don, 1660.
Schodeler [Schodoler], Wernher. Eidgeno¨ssische Chronik [Schodeler]. Brem-
garten an der Reuss, [ca. 1510–35]. Reprint, Luzern: Faksimile-Verlag,
1980.
Selden, John. Mare clausum, of the Dominion, or, Ownership of the Sea [Mare
Clausum]. London, 1635. Reprint, Clark, N.J.: Lawbook Exchange,2002.
Seneca. De beneﬁciis. In Seneca, Moral Essays, vol. 3. Translated by John W.
Basore. Loeb Classical Library, no. 310. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1935.
———. De ira I. In Seneca, Moral Essays. De providentia. De constantia. De
ira. De clementia, translated by John W. Basore. Loeb Classical Library,
no. 214. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1928.
Sextus Aurelius Victor. De Viris Illustribus [Auctor de Viris Illust.]. In Sexti
Aurelii Victoris Liber de Caesaribus. Praecedunt Origo gentis Romanae et
Liber de viris illustribus urbis Romae. Subsequitur Epitome de Caesaribus,
edited by Franz Pichlmayr and Roland Gru¨ndel. Leipzig: B. G. Teubneri,
1966.
Sharaf ad-Din ÛAli Yazdi. The History of Timur-Bec, Known by the Name of
Tamerlain the Great [Hist. of Timur-Bec]. From the Persian by Chere-
feddin Ali. Translated into French by Petis de la Croix and into English
by John Darby. 2 vols. London, 1723.


824
bibliography
Simler, Josias. De Helvetiorum republica [de Repub. Helvet.]. Zu¨rich, 1576.
Socrates of Constantinople [Scholasticus]. Ecclesiastical History [Hist. Ec-
cles.]. Whiteﬁsh, Mont.: Kessinger, 2003.
Solı´s y Rivadeneira, Antonio de. Historia de la conquista de Me´xico. Spain,
1686.Modernedition,PrologueandappendicesbyEdmundoO’Gorman.
Notes by Jose´ Valero Silva. Mexico City, 1973. Published in English as
History of the Conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards. Translated by Thomas
Townsend. London, 1742.
Stettler, Michael. Chronikon oder Grundliche Beschreibung der fu¨rnembsten
Geschichte und Thaten, welche sich in gantzer Helvetia, den ju¨ngsten Jahren
nach, von ihrem Anfang her gerechnet, . . . bis auff das 1627. Jahr/participirt,
verlauffen. Bern, 1627.
Stumpf, Johannes. Gemeiner loblicher Eydgnoschafft Stetten/Landen vnd
Vo¨lckeren Chronick wirdiger thaaten beschreybung. Zu¨rich, 1554.
Sully, Maximilien de Be´thune, Duc de. Me´moires de Maximilien de Be´thune
Duc de Sully, principal ministre de Henry le Grand, mis en ordre: Avec des
re´marques [Memoirs digested by M. de l’Ecluse] [Sully’s Memoirs] [Sully’s
Memoirs, by M. de l’Ecluse]. Edited by Pierre Mathurin de L’E´cluse des
Loges. London [Paris], 1752.
Tacitus, Annales I. In Tacitus, Histories 4–5. Annals 1–3, translatedbyClifford
H. Moore and John Jackson. Loeb Classical Library, no. 249. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1931.
———. Annales II [Tacit. Annal. lib. ii]. In Tacitus, Histories 4–5. Annals 1–
3, translated by Clifford H. Moore and John Jackson. Loeb Classical Li-
brary, no. 249. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1931.
———. Annales III. In Tacitus, Histories 4–5. Annals 1–3, translated by Clif-
ford H. Moore and John Jackson. Loeb Classical Library, no. 249. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1931.
———. Annales XII. In Tacitus, Annals 4–6, 11–12, translated by John Jack-
son. Loeb Classical Library, no. 312. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1937.
———. Annales XIII. In Tacitus, Annals 13–16, translated by John Jackson.
Loeb Classical Library, no. 322. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1937.
———. Annales XIV. In Tacitus, Annals 13–16, translated by John Jackson.
Loeb Classical Library, no. 322. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1937.
Tertullian. Tertullian De exhortatione castitatis [Exhort. Castit.]: Ermahnung


bibliography
825
zur Keuscheit. In Tertullian, edited by Hans-Veit Friedrich. Stuttgart:
Teubner, 1990.
Thou [De Thou], Jacques Auguste de. A. Thuani historiarum sui temporis.
Geneva, 1620. Published in English as Monsieur de Thou’s History of His
Own Times. Translated by Bernhard Wilson. London, 1729–30.
Thucydides. The History of the Peloponnesian War, Books 3–4. Translated by
C. F. Smith. Loeb Classical Library, no. 109, rev. ed. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1930.
Tribbechov, Adam. Exercitationes ad baronii annales ubi desiit Isaacus Casau-
bonus: In Acad. Kiloniensi ad disputandum propositae Kilonium [ad Baron.
Annal.]. Kiel: Reumann, 1667; later edition Leipzig: Reumann, 1708.
Tschudi, Aegidius. Chronicon Helveticorum. Basle, 1734–36. Reprint, Bern:
Allgemeine Geschichtsforschende Gesellschaft der Schweiz, 1968–2000.
Turretini [Turretin] [Turretinus], Franc¸ois. Compendium theologicae didacto-
elencticae [Turretin, Hist. Ecclesiast. Compendium]. Published in English
as Institutes of Elenctic Theology. Edited by James T. Dennison. Translated
by George Musgrave Giger. Phillipsburg, N.J.: P & R Publications, 1992.
Valerius Maximus [Valer. Maxim.]. Factorum et dictorum memorabilium
[Valer. Max.]. In Valerius Maximus, Memorable Doings and Sayings, trans-
lated by D. R. Shackleton Bailey. 2 vols. Loeb Classical Library, nos. 492,
493. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000.
Varro. De lingua Latina V [de Ling. Lat. lib. iv]. In Varro, On the Latin Lan-
guage, translated by Roland G. Kent. Loeb ClassicalLibrary,no.333.Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1951.
Vattel, Emer de. Le loisir philosophique ou pie`ces diverses de philosophie, de mo-
rale, et d’amusement. Geneva, 1747.
———. Me´langes de litte´rature, de morale, et de politique. Neuchaˆtel: Edit.
du Journal Helve´tique, 1760.
Vega, Garcilaso de la. Royal Commentaries of the Incas and General History of
Peru [Garcillasso de la Vega]. Edited and translated by Harold V. Liver-
more. Lisbon, 1609. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1966.
Velly, (Abbe´) Paul Franc¸ois. Histoire de France, depuis l’e´tablissement de la
monarchie jusqu’au re`gne de Louis XIV—Nouvelle e´dition [Abbe´ Velly,His-
tory of France] [Hist. of France]. Vols. 1–7 by Velly. Vols. 8–17 by C. Vil-
laret. Vols. 18–30 by J. J. Garnier. Paris, 1755–86.
———. Poliergie, ou Meˆlange de litte´rature et de poe¨sies. Amsterdam: Arkste´e
et Merkus, 1757.
Vertot, Rene´-Aubert de. History of the Revolutions in Sweden, Occasioned by


826
bibliography
the Change in Religion [History of the Revolutions in Sweden]. London,
1696.
———. Revolutions of Portugal. Translated by G. Roussillon. London,
1721.
Virgil. Aeneid II. In Virgil, Eclogues, Georgics, Aeneid Books 1–6, translatedby
H. Rushton Fairclough, revised by G. P. Goold. Loeb Classical Library,
no. 63. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1916.
———. Aeneid VI. In Virgil, Eclogues, Georgics, Aeneid Books 1–6, translated
by H. Rushton Fairclough, revised by G. P. Goold. Loeb ClassicalLibrary,
no. 63. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1916.
———. Aeneid X [Aen.]. In Virgil, Aeneid 7–12, Appendix Vergiliana, trans-
lated by H. Rushton Fairclough, revised by G. P. Goold. Loeb Classical
Library, no. 64. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1918.
———. Eclogues. In Virgil, Eclogues, Georgics, Aeneid Books 1–6, translated
by H. Rushton Fairclough, revised by G. P. Goold. Loeb ClassicalLibrary,
no. 63. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1916.
Vogel, Franz Adam. Traite´ historique et politique des alliances entre la France
et les XIII. Cantons: Depuis Charles VII jusqu’a` pre´sent par Mr. Vogel
G[rand] J[uge] D[es] G[ardes] S[uisses]. Suivant la copie imprime´e-Paris
[Vogel’s Historical and Political Treatise]. 1733.
Vopiscus,Flavius.Probus [Prob.].InHistoriaAugusta III, translatedbyDavid
Magie. Loeb Classical Library, no. 263. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1932.
Wattenwyl (French spelling is Watteville), Alexander Ludwig von. Histoirede
la Confe´de´ration helve´tique [History of the Helvetic Confederacy] [Hist. of
the Helvetic Confederacy]. Bern: Gottschall, 1754.
Wicquefort, Abraham de. The Embassador and His Functions [The Ambas-
sador] [Embassador] [Embassad.] [Embass.]. Translated by John Digby.
London, 1716. Reprint, Leicester: Leicester University, 1997.
Witt, Johan de. Brieven geschreven ende gewisselt tusschen den Heer Johan de
Witt. [De Witt’s Letters and Negotiations] Gravenhage, 1723–25. Modern
edition, Brieven van Johan de Witt. Edited by Robert Fruin. Amsterdam:
J. Mu¨ller, 1919.
Wolf[f], Christian. Ius naturae et ius gentium [Jus Gent.] [Law of Nations]
[Law of Nature] [Wolf, Jus Gent.] [Wolf, Jus Gentium] [Wolf, Jus Nat.]
[Wolﬁi, Jus Gent.] [Wolﬁus, Jus Gent.] [Wolﬁus, Jus Nat.]. Halle, 1740–
46. Reprinted in J. Ecole et al., eds., Christian Wolff: Gesammelte Werke,
series 2 (Latin), vol. 61. Hildesheim [Zurich] New York, 1960.


bibliography
827
———. Ius gentium methodo scientiﬁca pertractatum. Translated by Joseph
H. Drake. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1934.
———. Philosophia practica universalis methodo scientiﬁca pertractata [Phil.
Pract. Univ.]. Frankfurt, 1738–39. Reprinted in Gesammelte Schriften.
Abtl. 2, Lateinische Schriften. Band 10–11. Hildesheim: Olms, 1971–78.
———. Theologia naturalis scientiﬁca pertractata [Theol. nat.]. 2 vols.Frank-
furt, 1736–37.
Xenophon [Xenoph.]. Constitution of Lacedaemon [Lacedaemon. Respub-
lica.]. In Xenophon, Hiero. Agesilaus. Constitution of the Lacedaemonians.
Ways and Means. Cavalry Commander. Art of Horsemanship. On Hunting.
Constitution of the Athenians, translated by E. C. Marchant and G. W.
Bowersock. Loeb Classical Library, no. 183. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1925.
———. Cyropaedia V [Cyrop.]. In Xenophon, Cyropaedia 5–8, translatedby
Walter Miller. Loeb Classical Library, no. 52. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1914.
———. Hellenica. [Hist. Graec.] In Xenophon, Hellenica Books 1–4, trans-
latedbyCarletonL.Brownson.LoebClassicalLibrary,no.88.Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1918.
Writings on Vattel
Bandelier, Andre´. “De Berlin a` Neuchaˆtel: La gene`se du Droit des gens
d’Emer de Vattel.” In Schweizer im Berlin des 18. Jahrhunderts, 45–56, ed-
ited by Martin Fontius and Helmut Holzhey, Berlin: Akademie Verlag,
1996.
Baudenet D’Annoux, Henry. Le de´veloppement de la neutralite´ de Grotius a`
Vattel. Orle´ans: A. Gout, 1910.
Beaulac, Ste´phane. “Emer de Vattel and the Externalization of Sovereignty.”
Journal of the History of International Law 5 (2003): 237–92.
———. “The Westphalian Legal Orthodoxy—Myth or Reality?” Journal of
the History of International Law 2 (2000): 148–77.
Be´guelin, Eduard. “En souvenir de Vattel.” In Recueil de travaux, 35–176.
Neuchaˆtel: Attinger, 1929.
Brierly, J. L. The Law of Nations. 6th ed. Oxford: Clarendon, 1963.
Bull, Hedley. The Anarchical Society: A Study of Order in World Politics. Lon-
don: Macmillan, 1977.


828
chapter iv
99
merit,—public rewards to services done to the state. In a word, he uses
the public power only with a view to the public welfare. All this is com-
prehended in that ﬁne saying of Lewis XII.10 “A king of France does not
revenge the injuries of a duke of Orleans.”
A political society is a moral person (prelim. §2) inasmuch as it has
an understanding and a will of which it makes use for the conduct of
its affairs, and is capable of obligations and rights. When therefore a
people confer the sovereignty on any one person, they invest him with
their understanding and will, and make over to him their obligations
and rights, so far as relates to the administration of the state, and to the
exercise of the public authority. Thesovereign,orconductorof thestate,
thus becoming the depositary of the obligations and rights relative to
government, in him is found the moral person, who, without absolutely
ceasing to exist in the nation, acts thenceforwards only in him and by
him. Such is the origin of the representative character attributed to the
sovereign. He represents the nation in all the affairs in which he may
happen to be engaged as a sovereign. It does not debase the dignity of
the greatest monarch to attribute to him this representative character;
on the contrary, nothing sheds a greater lustre on it, since the monarch
thus unites in his own person all the majesty that belongs to the entire
body of the nation.
The sovereign, thus clothed with the public authority, with every
thing that constitutes the moral personality of the nation, of course be-
comes bound by the obligations of that nation, and invested with its
rights.
All that has been said in chap. II. of the general duties of a nation
towards itself, particularly regards the sovereign. He is the depositary of
the empire, and of the power of commanding whatever conduces to the
public welfare; he ought, therefore, as a tender and wise father, and as a
faithful administrator, to watch for the nation, and take care to preserve
it, and render it more perfect,—to better its state, and to secure it, as far
as possible, against every thing that threatens its safety or its happiness.
10. Louis XII, called “Father of the People,” r. 1498–1515.
§40. Of his
representative
character.
§41. He is
intrusted with
the obligations
of the nation,
and invested
with its rights.
§42. His duty
with respect
to the preser-
vation and
perfection of
the nation.


100
book i: nations in themselves
Hence all the rights which a nation derives from its obligation to pre-
serve and perfect itself, and to improve its state, (see §§18, <15> 20, and
23, of this book)—all these rights, I say, reside in the sovereign, who is
therefore indifferently called the conductor of the society, superior,
prince, &c.
We have observed above, that every nation ought to know itself. This
obligation devolves on the sovereign, since it is he who is to watch over
the preservation and perfection of the nation. The duty which the law
of nature here imposes on the conductors of nations is of extreme im-
portance, and of considerable extent. They ought exactly to know the
whole country subject to their authority,—its qualities, defects, advan-
tages, and situation with regard to the neighbouring states; and they
ought to acquire a perfect knowledge of the manners and general incli-
nations of their people, their virtues, vices, talents, &c. All these
branches of knowledge are necessary to enable them to govern properly.
The prince derives his authority from the nation; he possesses just so
much of it as they have thought proper to intrust him with.* If the
nation has plainly and simply invested him with the sovereigntywithout
limitation or division, he is supposed to be invested with all the prerog-
atives, without which the sovereign command or authority could not be
exerted in the manner most conducive to the public welfare. These are
called regal prerogatives, or the prerogatives of majesty.
* Neque enim se princeps reipublicae et singulorum dominum arbitrabitur,
quamvis assentatoribus id in aurem insusurrantibus, sed rectorem mercede a civibus
designata, quam augere, nisi ipsis volentibus, nefas existimabit. Ibid. c. v. [[“For the
prince will not consider himself lord of the state and of individuals, however much
yes-men might whisper in his ear, but rather a governor with remuneration assigned
by the citizens which he will think it unlawful to increase except by their wish”(trans.
Eds.). The source is not identiﬁed.]]—From this principle it follows that the nation
is superior to the sovereign. Quod caput est, sit principi persuasum, totiusreipublicae
majorem quam ipsius unius auctoritatem esse: neque pessimis hominibus credat di-
versum afﬁrmantibus gratiﬁcandi studio; quae magnaperniciesest.Ibid.[[“Thechief
point is, let the prince be persuaded that the authority of the entire state is greater
than that of one person in himself, and let him not believe the opposite when the
worst of men afﬁrm it out of a desire to curry favor, which is a great evil” (trans.
Eds.). The source is not identiﬁed. Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§43. His rights
in this respect.
§44. He ought
to know the
nation.
§45. The
extent of
his power.
Prerogatives
of majesty.


chapter iv
101
But when the sovereign power is limited and regulated by the fun-
damental laws of the state, those laws shew the prince the extent and
bounds of his power, and the manner in which he is to exert it. The
prince is therefore strictly obliged not only to respect, but also tosupport
them. The constitution and the fundamental laws are the plan on which
the nation has resolved to labour for the attainment of happiness: the
execution is intrusted to the prince. Let him religiously follow this
plan,—let him consider the fundamental laws as inviolable and sacred
rules,—and remember thatthemomenthedeviatesfromthem,hiscom-
mands become unjust, and are but a criminal abuse of the power with
which he is intrusted. He is, by virtue of that power, the guardian and
defender of the laws:—and while it is his duty to restrain each daring
violator of them, ought he himself to trample them under foot?* <16>
If the prince be invested with the legislative power, he may, according
to his wisdom, and when the public advantage requires it, abolish those
laws that are not fundamental, and make new ones. See what we have
said on this subject in the preceding chapter, §34.
But while these laws exist, the sovereign ought religiously tomaintain
and observe them. They are the foundation of the public tranquillity,
and the ﬁrmest support of the sovereign authority. Every thing is un-
certain, violent, and subject to revolutions, in those unhappy states
where arbitrary power has placed her throne. It is therefore the true in-
* In some countries, formal precautions are taken against the abuse of power.—
“Reﬂecting, among other things (says Grotius), that princes are often found to make
no scruple of violating their promises under the stale pretext of the public good, the
people of Brabant, in order to obviate that inconvenience, established the custom of
never admitting their prince to the possession of the government without having
previously made with him a covenant, that, whenever he may happen to violate the
laws of the country, they shall be absolved from the oath of obediencethey hadsworn
to him, until ample reparation be made for the outrages committed. The truth of
this is conﬁrmed by the example of past generations, who formerly made effectual
use of arms and decrees to reduce within proper bounds such of their sovereigns as
had transgressed the line of duty, whether through their own licentiousness or the
artiﬁces of their ﬂatterers. Thus it happened to John the Second: nor would they
consent to make peace with him or his successors, until those princes had entered
into a solemn engagement to secure the citizens in the enjoyment of their privileges.”
Annals of the Netherlands, book ii. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§46. The
prince ought
to respect and
support the
fundamental
laws.
§47. He may
change the
laws not
fundamental.
§48. He ought
to maintain
and observe
the existing
laws.

102
bibliography
Butler, Peter F. “Legitimacy in a States-System: Vattel’s Law of Nations.” In
The Reason of States, edited by Michael Donelan, 45–63. London: Allen
and Unwin, 1978.
Cavallar, Georg. The Rights of Strangers: Theories of International Hospitality,
the Global Community, and Political Justice Since Vitoria, 306–17. Alder-
shot: Ashgate, 2002.
Dufour, Alfred. “Religion, e´glise,e´tatdanslapense´ed’EmerdeVattel.”Muse´e
Neuchaˆtelois 2002: 169–92.
Fenwick, Charles G. “The Authority of Vattel.” American Political Science
Review 7 (1913): 395–410.
Guggenheim, Paul. Emer de Vattel et l’e´tude des relations internationales en
Suisse. Gene`ve: Georg et Cie, 1956.
———. “Lasouverainete´ dansl’histoiredudroitdesgensdeVitoriaa`Vattel.”
In Me´langes offerts a` Juray Andrassy, edited by Vladimir Ibler, 111–21. La
Haye: Martin Nijhoff, 1968.
Haggenmacher, Peter. “L’Etat souverain comme sujet du droit international,
de Vitoria a` Vattel.” Droits: Revue franc¸aise de the´orie juridique 16 (1992):
11–20. Paris: PUF.
Hochstrasser, Timothy J. Natural Law Theories in the Early Enlightenment,
177–83. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Hurell, Andrew. “Vattel: Pluralism and Its Limits.” In Classical Theories of
International Relations, edited by Ian Clark and Iver B. Neumann, 233–
55. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1996.
Jouannet, Emmanuelle. “La critique de la pense´e classique durant l’entre-
deux guerres: Vattel et Van Vollenhoven (Quelques re´ﬂexions sur le mo-
de`le classique du droit international).” Miskolc Journal of International
Law 1 (2004): 45–63.
———. Emer de Vattel et l’e´mergence doctrinale du droit international clas-
sique. Paris: A. Pedrone, 1998.
———. “Vattel et la suje´tion directe de l’Etat au droit international.” In
L’Etat Moderne: Regards sur la pense´e politique de l’Europe Occidentaleentre
1715 et 1848, edited by Simone Goyard-Fabre, 153–79. Paris: J. Vrin, 2000.
Kant, Immanuel. “Perpetual Peace.” In Kant: Political Writings, edited by
H. S. Reiss. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Kapossy, Be´la. Iselin contra Rousseau: Sociable Patriotism and the History of
Mankind. Basel: Schwabe, 2006.
Kelsen, Hans. “Quincy Wright’s A Study of War and the BellumJustumThe-
ory.” Ethics 3, no. 3 (1943): 208–11.


bibliography
829
Koskenniemi, Martti. From Apology to Utopia: The Structure of International
Legal Argument, 89–97. Helsinki: Finnish Lawyers’ Publishing Co., 1989.
Lapradelle, Albert de. Introduction to The Law of Nations or the Principles
of Natural Law, by Emer de Vattel, iii–lix. Carnegie ed. Washington,
D.C., 1916. Reprint, New York: Oceana, 1964.
Linklater, Andrew. Men and Citizens in the Theory of International Relations.
London: Macmillan, 1982.
Manz, Johannes. Emer de Vattel: Versuch einer Wu¨rdigung; Unter besonderer
Beru¨cksichtigung seiner Auffassung von der individuellen Freiheit und der
souvera¨nen Gleichheit. Diss. Zu¨rich, 1971.
Midgley, E. B. F. The Natural Law Tradition and the Theory of International
Relations, 184–95. London: Elek, 1975.
Montmorency, J. E. G. de. “Emerich de Vattel.” Journal of theSocietyof Com-
parative Legislation, n.s., 10 (1909): 17–39. Reprinted in Great Jurists of the
World, edited by John Macdonell and Edward Manson, 477–504.Boston:
Little, Brown, 1914.
Nussbaum,A.AConciseHistoryof theLawof Nations. NewYork:Macmillan,
1954.
Onuf, Nicholas Greenwood. “Civitas Maxima: Wolff, Vattel, and the Fate
of Republicanism.” American Journal of International Law 88 (1994): 280–
303.
Rabkin, Jeremy. “Grotius, Vattel, and Locke: An Older View of Liberalism
and Nationality.” Review of Politics 59 (1997): 292–322.
Remec, Peter Pavel. The Position of the Individual in International Law Ac-
cording to Grotius and Vattel. The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1960.
Ruddy, Francis Stephen. “The Acceptance of Vattel.” Grotian Society Papers
1972: 177–96. The Hague: M. Nijhoff.
———. International Law in the Enlightenment: The Background of Emmer-
ich de Vattel’s Le Droit des Gens. Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Oceana, 1975.
Schmitt, Carl. Der Nomos der Erde im Vo¨lkerrecht des Jus Publicum Euro-
paeum. 4th ed. Berlin: Duncker and Humblot, 1997.
Senellart, Michel. “La qualiﬁcation de l’ennemi chez Emer de Vattel.” Aste´r-
ion, no. 2 (juillet 2004) 31–51.
Staub, Hans. Die Vo¨lkerrechtlichen Lehren Vattels im Lichte der naturrecht-
lichen Doktrin: Ein Beitrag zur Gru¨ndungsgeschichte des Vo¨lkerrechts. Ber-
lin: Vahlen, 1922.
The´venaz, Henri. “Vattel ou La destine´e d’un livre.” SchweizerischesJahrbuch
fu¨r Internationales Recht 14 (1957): 9–16.


830
bibliography
Tuck, Richard. The Rights of War and Peace: Political Thought and the Inter-
national Order from Grotius to Kant, 191–96. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1999.
Van Vollenhoven, Cornelius. Du droit de paix. De iure pacis. La Haye:
M. Nijhoff, 1932.
———. Les trois phases du Droit des gens. La Haye: M. Nijhoff, 1919.
Whelan, Frederick G. “Vattel’s Doctrine of the State.” History of Political
Thought 9 (1988): 59–90. Reprinted in Grotius, Pufendorf, and Modern
Natural Law, edited by K. Haakonssen, 403–34. Brookﬁeld, Vt.: Dart-
mouth Publishing, 1998.
Wright, Quincy. Preface to The Position of theIndividualinInternationalLaw
According to Grotius and Vattel, by Peter Pavel Remec. The Hague:
M. Nijhoff, 1960.
———. A Study of War. 2 vols. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1942.
Zurbuchen, Simone. “Die schweizerische Debatte u¨ber die Leibniz-
Wolffsche Philosophie und ihre Bedeutung fu¨r Emer von Vattels philo-
sophischen Werdegang.” In Reconceptualizing Nature, Science, and Aes-
thetics: Contributiona` unenouvelleapprochedesLumie`reshelvetiques, edited
by Patrick Coleman, Anne Hofmann, and Simone Zurbuchen, 91–113.
Gene`ve: Slatkine, 1998.

831
index
This index uses modern American spelling, with original usage enclosed in pa-
rentheses orcross-referencedwhen necessary.Declarations,councils,treaties,and
the like will be found under their main element; thus the treaty of Madrid is
located under M. For names including the French preﬁx de or d’, please check
under the main element (Franc¸ois de Callie`res, for instance, will be under C ).
abandonment: of sovereignty, 212;
usucaption and prescription, 331–
38
Absalum, bishop of Roschild, 474n
absurdities, interpretation of treaties
leading to, 418–19, 428
academicians, as enemies, 550
accommodation, amicable, 450
Achilles, 581
active and passive obligation, 751–52;
basis for, 766
Adeimantus, 545n
Adrets, Franc¸ois de Beaumont, baron
des, 646
Adrian (Hadrian; Roman emperor),
125
Adriatic Sea, Venetian control of,
254–55
Aduatici, 546n
aged people, as enemies, 549
agents, ambassadorial, 693
Agesilau¨s, 536
aggrandizement of neighboring
power as just cause for war, 491–99
Agincourt, battle of, 555–56
agriculture: government support for,
128–31; peasants, as enemies, 550–51
Aix-la-Chapelle, treaty of, 400, 503,
568
Alba (Alva), Don Fernando A´lvarez
de Toledo y Pimental, 3rd duke of,
546n, 642–43, 646n, 703
Albert II the Wise (king of Austria),
402
Albigenses (Cathars), 183n
Alcibiades, 563–64n
Alexander VI (pope), 173, 215n
Alexander the Great, 486, 511, 545,
546, 562, 600, 607
Algerian corsairs. See piracy
alienation of property, 237–42; by
corporations, 232–33; nation, alien-
ation of part of, 240–42; in peace
treaties, 657–59; public property,
237–40
alliances, 512–23; aggrandizing pow-
ers, controlling, 496; casus foederis
in, 515–16; civil wars of other na-
tions, involvement in, 648–49;
declarations of war against ene-
mies’ allies, 522–23; defensive, 512,
519–21; embassy and, 686; enemies’
associates and allies, 517–23; equal
alliances vs. equal treaties, 348; just


832
index
alliances (continued )
cause for, 513–14; in just war only,
514–16; with nations already at war,
514; offensive, 512, 519; peace trea-
ties and, 661–62, 675, 677, 680–
81; personal, 355, 362–64; post-
liminium, 604–5; precedence of
more ancient allies regarding trea-
ties, 344; real, 355–59, 364–65; re-
fusal of help as injury in, 517;
ruptures between former allies, 517;
troops or funds provided by, 513;
unequal, 349–55, 683–85; warlike
associations vs., 512
alluvion, right of, 244–45, 247–49
Alphonso VIII (king of Castile), 231n
Alphonso V (king of Portugal), 121,
216n
Alva (Alba), Don Fernando A´lvarez
de Toledo y Pimental, 3rd duke of,
546n, 642–43, 646n, 703
Alvakedi, 721n
ambassadors. See embassy
ambiguous or equivocal expressions,
416–18, 420–21, 432–33
Ambrose of Milan, 176
America: Canada (see Canada); Euro-
pean colonization of (see coloniza-
tion); Indians (see Native
Americans); Spanish attacks on, 275
American Revolution, ix
amicable accommodation, 450
Ammianus Marcellinus, 329n, 426n,
797
amnesties, 664
Amurath (Murad) II (sultan), 388
Anaxilau¨s, 564n
Ancona, 280
androlepsia, 465
Anne (queen of England), 573
Anne of Austria (regent of France),
657–58n
Anson, George, 555, 797
Antaeus, 291
antichresis, 398
anticipation, right of, 234
Antiochus IV Epiphanes (Seleucid
ruler), 394, 417, 522
Antoninus (Roman emperor), 125
Antony the Bastard of Burgundy,
548n
Appian[us], 668n, 797
Arabs, 310, 721–22. See also Islam
Aragon. See Spain, and individual
rulers
arbitrary law of nations, 17, 705
arbitration: between nations, 451–52;
between subjects and sovereigns,
109
Arbroath, declaration of, 106–7nn
Aristotle, 83, 797
armies. See entries at military
Arminius, 561
arrest of subject by way of reprisal,
465
Arrian (Lucius Flavius Arrianus),
546n, 797
artiﬁces and stratagems in war, 579–81
arts, national encouragement of, 146–
47
assassination: of enemies, 557–63; of
sovereigns, 103, 156, 170, 178–79,
716–19
the Assassins, 559–60, 722
asseverations used in treaties, 392
associations, warlike, vs. alliances, 512
asylum in ambassador’s house, 738–40
asylums for invalid soldiers, 476
Atahualpa (Incan emperor), 290
atheism, 765–66
Athenians. See Greeks
Attila the Hun, 487, 564
Augier de Marigny, Franc¸ois, 698n,
798
August[us] III (king of Poland), x,
525n
Augustus Caesar (Roman emperor),
653n, 668


index
833
Aulus Gellius, 561n, 798
Austria: commercial trading rights,
251; Swiss protectorates of dukes
of, 209, 212; Vienna, Turkish siege
of, 263; War of the Austrian Suc-
cession, 425, 481n, 521n, 534n, 554,
573n, 614, 616
authority: of body politic over its
members, 81–82; Catholic inde-
pendence from, 174–79; embassy,
authority to send, 683, 704–5; of
judges, 189; over clergy, 164–70;
over peace treaties, 655–57, 659–
60; over public ministers, 112; over
public property, 229–30; over reli-
gious matters, 168–69; over repri-
sals, 462; over treaties and
conventions, 338–39, 372–73; over
truces, 619–21; of sovereign, 100
auxiliary treaties, 512
auxiliary troops, 513
Avidius Cassius, 616
Bacallar y Sanna, Vicente, marquis
de San Felipe (marquis de St.
Philippe), 284n, 387n, 658n, 798
Bacon, Sir Francis, 205
balance of powers, 496–99
balance of trade, 139
banishment, 225–28, 307–8, 323
banks and banking, 144
banner, right of. See embassy
barbarians: migration of peoples,
328–29; Roman empire, admis-
sion to, 328–29; Tacitus on, 108,
161n, 306n, 394, 427n, 487, 809;
Teutoburg Forest, battle of, 561n;
war made without reason or mo-
tive by, 487
Barbary corsairs. See piracy
Barbeyrac, Jean: on embassy, 717; on
law of nature and law of nations,
9–10; on national responsibility for
actions of citizens, 301n; on natu-
ral law, 755–58, 759n, 761, 763–67,
768–69, 770; on obligation, 752–53;
on sovereigns, 111; translations and
commentaries, xvi; on treaties, 433n
Barkuk or Barquq (Barcouc; sultan of
Egypt), 719n
Bartolus, 283n
Basilius II (Byzantine emperor), 717
Baste, George, 631
Battory, 631
Baune, Renauld de, 174n
Bayard, chevalier de, 547
Bayle, Pierre, 756n
bays, sovereignty over, 255–56
Beaumont, Franc¸ois de, baron des
Adrets, 646
Beaumont, Monsieur De (French
ambassador to Britain), 743
Bedamar, marquis of, 716
Belisarius, 550n, 571–72
Bellay, Martin Du, 700n, 725n, 798
Belle-Isle, Charles-Louis-Auguste
Fouget, duc de, 616
Benedict XIV (pope), 199–200, 268,
286n
Bernard, duke of Saxe-Weymar, 726n
Bernard, Jacques, 756, 798
Bernouilli, Jacob, 205
Bessus, 562
Be´thune, Maximilien de, duc de
Sully, xi, 161, 238, 504n, 631, 710,
743, 789, 809
Beuningen, Coenraad van, 296n,
665n
biblical citations: 1 Samuel 19–20,
112n; Timothy 1:9, 771
Bilaine, Antoine, 102n, 798
Bodinus (Jean Bodin), 144, 254, 283n,
293n, 315, 318, 798
Boeotians, 420
Boizard, Jean, 142n, 799
bombardment of towns, 570, 572–73
Boniface VIII (pope), 170–71
Bontekoe, Willem, 321, 799


834
index
booty, 568–69, 593–603
Boreel (ambassador), 463n, 532n
Borgia, Cesare, 289
Boufﬂers, Louis Franc¸ois, duc de, 577
Bougeant, Guillaume Hyacinthe,
390n, 726n, 799
Bouillon, French ambassador to
Britain, 291n
boundaries: rivers and streams as,
242–47; settlement of, 308
Bourbon Conde´, Anne Genevie`ve de,
305n, 799
Brandenburg, French refugees in, 329
breaches of peace treaties, 673–81
Breda, treaty of, 254
Breslau, Treaty of, 370
bribery by ambassadors, 709–10
bridges and highways, maintenance
of, 139–41
Brienne, Jean, count de, 286n
Britain: Aix-la-Chapelle, treaty of,
400, 503, 568; arts and sciences,
national encouragement of, 147;
balance of powers, maintaining,
497; Civil War and Common-
wealth, 106–8, 282, 685, 689; com-
merce of, 131, 132, 137n;
contraband goods, 529; Glorious
Revolution, 290, 364–65; Lisbon
earthquake, public collections fol-
lowing, 264; maritime law of, 251,
252–54; neutrality and use of ports,
526n; obligations and rights be-
tween nations, former nonrecogni-
tion of, 273n; peace, right to make,
656; prisoners of war, treatment of,
553; Prussian vessels, seizure of,
304; religion, sovereign’s authority
in matters of, 168–69; reprisals
against Netherlands in favor of
Knights of Malta, 463; self-
preservation and perfection as aim
of, 89–91; sovereign succession in,
116, 122; standing army, lack of
need for, 500; taxation in, 230;
treaty keeping of, 343; valor, na-
tional reputation for, 200; Vattel’s
admiration of, xviii–xix; war, right
of sovereign to make, 471
Bru¨hl, count, x–xi, xix, 19n2
Bruneau (secretary to Spanish ambas-
sador in France), 710, 718–19
Brutus (Marcus Junius Brutus
Caepio), 154
Budaeus or Buddeus, Johann Franz,
10, 799
Bullinger, Heinrich, 212n, 799
Burgundy, Antony the Bastard of,
548n
Burgundy, Charles, duke of, 634n
Burgundy, Philip, duke of, 389
Burgundy, Philip, son of Antony the
Bastard of, 548n
burial of dead during time of truce,
626–27
Burlamaqui, Jean-Jacques, x
burning of enemy property, 570–73
Busiris (king of Egypt), 291
buying, right of, 133, 134
Bynkershoek, Cornelius van, 463n,
717n, 730n, 732n, 736, 799–800
Caecina, 437
Caepio (Servilius Caepio), 583
Caesar, Gaius Julius. See Julius
Caesar
Caius Luscinus Fabricius, 560–61
Caius Pontius, 488
Callie`res, Franc¸ois de, 732, 800
Cambray, congress of, 453
Camden, William, 413, 718n, 800
Camillus (Marius Furius Camillus),
484n, 601
Campanella, Tommaso, 302, 800
Canada: Hudson’s Bay, 255; mission-
aries to Hurons, 166
canals, bridges, and highways, main-
tenance of, 139–41


index
835
Can Natural Law Bring Society to Per-
fection Without the Assistance of Po-
litical Laws? (Vattel): editions and
translations, xxiii; text, 773–81;
Vattel’s writing of, xi
Canson (Mameluke sultan), 698n
capital punishment. See killing
capitulation of towns and cities, 629–
32
Caraffa (papal legate), 389
carriages of ambassadors, 707–8n,
740–41
Carthage: commerce of, 131; treaties
with Rome, 351–52, 354–55, 440–
42, 660; wars with Rome, 354–55,
455, 576, 660
Castile. See Spain, and individual
rulers
casus foederis in alliances, 515–16
Cathars (Albigenses), 183n
Catholicism, 169–85; asylum, embas-
sies in Rome as places of, 739–40;
British rejection of Catholic kings,
116; celibacy of clergy, 174–76,
199–200; convents/monasteries,
175, 199–200, 475; division of New
World between Spain and Portugal
by papacy, 215; Dutch ships, pro-
tection offered to, 268; excommu-
nication, 180–82; as foreign power,
173–74; French Canada, mission-
aries to Hurons of, 166; immunity
of clergy, 177–79; independence
from civil authority, 174–79; laws
and customs pernicious to state,
184–85; power of papacy, 170–73;
property of church, 179–80, 184;
titles and honors conferred by
pope, 286–87; treaties violated by
pope, 388–90; Vattel’s anti-
Catholic sentiments, xviii–xix
Catiline (Lucius Sergius Catilina), 436
Caudine Forks, battle of, 374–82,
481–82
Cedrenus, 717
celibacy of clergy, 174–76, 199–200
Cellamare, prince de, 715
Cesarini (papal legate), 388
Ceylon, 278, 721
Chaloner, Thomas, 723
Champier, Symphorien, 547n, 800
Charlemagne, 282–83, 293
Charles, duke of Burgundy, 634n
Charles, duke of Sudermania, 689
Charles I (king of England), 107–8,
282n
Charles II (king of England), 506n,
689
Charles IV the Fair (king of France),
119–20
Charles V (king of France), 390
Charles VI (king of France), 112
Charles VIII (king of France), 173
Charles IX (king of France), 110
Charles IV (Holy Roman Emperor),
212, 283, 455n
Charles V (Holy Roman Emperor),
241–42, 283, 495, 656–57, 700,
702n, 704–5
Charles VI (Holy Roman Emperor),
347n, 365, 397, 666n
Charles I (king of Naples), 552
Charles III (king of Naples), 717–18
Charles II (king of Spain), 365, 493,
658n
Charles III (king of Spain), 644n
Charles XII (king of Sweden), 222n,
471, 554–55, 566n, 571, 656
Charles Emmanuel I, duke of Savoy,
504
Charles Emmanuel III of Savoy (king
of Sardinia), 429n, 458n, 525n
Charles Louis, elector Palatine, 726n
Charlevoix, Pierre Franc¸ois Xavier,
166, 800
Charnace´, baron De, 733
Chauvelin, Henri-Philippe, 178n,
800–801


836
index
Cheˆne, Marie de, xii
Chevalier, Nicolas, 573n, 577n, 801
children: of ambassadors, 741; citi-
zenship of, 219; as enemies, 510,
549; inheritance rights, 237; as pris-
oners of war, 551; safe-conducts for
individuals not covering, 635; of
vagrants, 220
China, 174, 309, 312, 721
Chitty, Joseph, xxi–xxii, 90n6, 137n
Choisy, Franc¸ois Timole´on de, 341n,
390n, 657n, 722n, 801
Christiern II (king of Denmark), 172,
401
Christina (queen of Sweden), 727
Churchill, John, 1st Duke of
Marlborough, 205, 415, 480
Cicero: on absurdity in philosophy,
118n; on assassination, 560n; bio-
graphical information, 801; on
common interests, 269n; on em-
bassy, 701; enemy property, treat-
ment of, 575; on great and elevated
souls, 271; on infractions of natu-
ral law by other nations, 76n; on
interpretation of treaties, 414, 425,
436, 437, 444n, 446, 447n; on jus-
tice, 19; on killing of enemies,
558n; on lying and perjury, 390–91;
on natural law, 749, 762, 763, 765,
774, 780; on obligations and rights
between nations, 259–61, 273n; on
peace, 651–52n; quarter, giving or
refusing to give, 544; on religion,
148–49, 161, 162n; on religion and
good governance, 785; on Socrates,
781; on superstition, 148–49; on
the useful vs. the honest, 787–88
cinnamon trade, 278
cities. See towns and cities
citizens and subjects: ambassadors
subjects of state where employed,
731–33; children of citizens born
out of country, 219; deﬁned, 217–
18; enemies, promises made by in-
dividuals to, 632–33; enemies,
whole nation as, 509–10, 612–18;
foreigners as, 314–15; glory of na-
tion and, 204–5; indemniﬁcation
against losses in war, 617–18; mar-
riage to aliens, 319; martial duty of,
473, 615; national obligations re-
garding actions by and against,
298–301; naturalization as, 218;
peace treaties violated by, 680;
quitting country, possibility of,
220–25; reprisal, arrest by way of,
465; soldiers, garrisoning of, 476;
valor and military virtues of, 200–
201; voluntary submission of nation
to foreign power, rights in cases of,
208; war, rights and obligations of
private persons in, 612–18
civil laws, 92–93
civil war, 641–49; British Civil War
and Commonwealth, 106–8, 282,
685, 689; common laws of war to
be observed in, 645–47; deﬁned,
644–45; effects of, 647–48; em-
bassy, respect for, 703; foreign na-
tions and allies, involvement of,
648–49; interference in quarrel be-
tween sovereign and subjects, 290–
91; obedience owed by subjects to
sovereigns, 109; obligations and
rights of sovereign in, 641, 642–44;
popular commotions, sedition, and
insurrections, 641–42; rebels, de-
ﬁned, 641; resistance, right of,
101n, 103–12, 288–89; truces, re-
volts during, 627; two independent
parties produced by, 645; tyrants,
right to overthrow, 101n, 103–12
civitas maxima, concept of, xv
clandestine seduction of enemies,
582–84
Clearchus, 564n
Clement, James, 156


index
837
Cleomenes (king of Sparta), 417
clergy: Catholic, 174–79; celibacy of,
174–76; as enemies, 550; indepen-
dence of, 174–79; sovereign au-
thority over, 164–68; in war, 474–75
Cloelia, 404
coastal seas, 252–58
Codrus (king of Athens), 153
coinage and coining, 141–44
colonization, 214–17; division of New
World between Spain and Portugal
by papacy, 215; domain over desert
and uninhabited places, 306–7, 311;
exile of people from their land,
307–8; India, European commerce
and colonization of, 131, 138; Na-
tive Americans, lands of, 216–17,
310; New England, Puritans in,
216–17; of Pennsylvania, 217;
Vattel’s views on, xv
Colonna, Prosper, 546n
commanders of armies, 480–82, 615
commerce: ambassadors, carried on
by, 734–35; besieged towns, trading
with, 533; consuls, 279–80, 693;
contraband goods, 505, 529–32;
free trade, 274; laws of, 132–36,
144; luxury and, 792; merchandise,
innocent right of passage for, 327–
28; monopolies, 138, 278–79; mu-
tual commerce between nations,
273–80; of nations considered in
themselves, 131–39; neutral ships,
searching of, 532–33; neutral states
trading with states at war, 528–34;
treaties, commercial, 136–37, 275–
78, 360
Commines, Philippe de, 205, 682, 801
commissioners, ambassadorial, 693
common property, 229, 232, 233–36
Commonwealth, British, 106–8, 282,
685, 689
companies, 138, 232–33. See also East
Indies companies
compromise, 450, 662–64
Conde´, Henri II, prince of, 305n, 801
Conde´, Louis II de Bourbon, prince
of, 305n, 646n
Coneo (Coni), siege of, 547, 616
confederacies, 84, 498
conferences and congresses to settle
disputes between nations, 452–53
conﬁscation of contraband goods,
530–32
conﬂict of laws or treaties, 443–47
conquest, 308, 568, 593, 596–603,
606–9
Conradin or Conrad V, duke of
Swabia, 552
Consalvi, Cardinal, ix, xviii–xix
conspiracies, ambassadorial, 713–19
Constance, council of, 327
Constantine I the Great (Roman em-
peror), 163, 169
Constantius Diogenes, 717
constitutional obligations and rights,
91–96
consuls, 279–80, 693
context and interpretation of treaties,
421–26
Conti, Armand de Bourbon, prince
of, 305
continental shelf, 252–58
contraband goods, 505, 529–32
contracts, private, made by sovereign,
382–86
contributions from enemies, 569, 668
conventional law of nations. See trea-
ties and conventions
convents, 175, 199–200, 475
Corea, 315
corporations, 138, 232–33. See also
East Indies companies
corsairs. See piracy
Corte´s, Hernando (Ferdinand
Cortes), 672–73
counterfeiters, 143
counterintelligence, 580, 585


838
index
countries, 217–28; children of citizens
born out of, 219; citizens, natives,
and inhabitants distinguished,
217–18; deﬁned, 153–54; establish-
ment of nation in, 213–17 (see also
domain); exile and banishment
from, 225–28; independent families
in, 310–11; love of country, encour-
aging, 152–55; migration from, 127,
198–200, 220–25; multiple nations,
possessed by, 309; private persons
possessing, 309–10; refugees, 225;
settlement, natural or acquired,
220; vagrants, 220. See also nations
couriers, ambassadorial, 742
courts, 188–89
credentials of ambassadors, 693, 745
Crevier, Jean Baptiste Louis, 395n,
801
criminal laws, 191–92
Croix, Petis de la, 98n, 414n, 560n,
565n, 719n
Cromwell, Oliver, 282, 285n, 685
Crousaz, Jean-Pierre de, x
Cueva, Bertrand de la, 121
Cujas, Jacques, 415n
Cumberland, duke of, 564–65
currency, 141–44
Curtius (Marcus Curtius), 154
Curtius Rufus (Quintus Curtius
Rufus), 562n, 600n, 801
customary law of nations, 77–78;
embassy and, 705, 724–25; hos-
tages, treatment of, 406; on post-
liminium, 611; usucaption and
prescription, 338
customs, 139, 723
Cyrus the Great, 550n
Damien[s], Robert Franc¸ois, 103n
Danguel, Louis-Joseph Plumard de
(John Nickolls), 132n, 806
Daniel, Gabriel, 341n, 555–56, 725n,
728n, 801
Darius III (king of Persia), 545, 562
David (biblical king), 111–12
Daxelhoffer, Captain, 519
death: burial of dead during time of
truce, 626–27; ransom of prisoners
and, 638–39, 640; safe-conducts
not expiring at, 636. See also killing
debts: of ambassadors, 731; enemies,
owed to, 511; pledges given for ful-
ﬁllment of, 398–400; of sovereign
and state, contracts regarding, 384–
85
deceitful intelligence, 580, 585
deception of the enemy, 576–81
the Decii, 154
declarations of war, 500–506, 522–23
defense, right of, 297
defensive alliances, 512, 519–21
defensive war, 471, 487–88, 503, 515
Demetrius (Greco-Bactrian king),
300–301
Demetrius (king of Macedonia), 533
Demosthenes, 465n, 802
Denmark: arbitration between sub-
jects and sovereigns in, 109; con-
traband goods, 529, 530n; Great
Northern War, 288n; papacy,
power of, 172; safe passage, grant-
ing of, 539
deputies, ambassadorial, 693
deputies sent to legislative assemblies,
727–29
Descartes, Rene´, 205
desert, domain over, 306–7
deserters, 549
destruction of enemy property, 570–
73
Dialogue Between the Prince of ****
and His Conﬁdant (Vattel): publi-
cation history, xxiii–xxiv; signiﬁ-
cance of, xxiii–xxiv; text of, 783–
96; Vattel’s economic reform
theory and, xviin21, xxiv
dialogues of Vattel, xi


index
839
Digest of Justinian. See Justinian I
dignity and equality of nations, 75,
281
Diodorus Siculus, 546, 802
Diogenes, xi
Diomede (king of Thrace), 291
Dionysius the Tyrant, 546
diplomacy. See embassy
discipline, military, 480, 615–16
dismemberment of state, 240–42
dispatches, ambassadorial, 742
disputes between nations, settling,
448–67; amicable accommodation,
450; arbitration, 451–52; compro-
mise, 450, 662–64; conferences
and congresses for purposes of,
452–53; equitable conditions, offer-
ing, 457; essential rights vs. rights
of less importance, 453–54; evident
vs. doubtful cases, 453, 455, 457;
just complaints, abandonment of,
448–49; just complaints, duty to
resolve, 448; justice, refusal of,
464; mediation, 450–51, 648–49,
662; natural law, means suggested
by, 450–52; possession as 9/10ths of
law, 457; reparations, 458; reprisals,
460–67; retaliation, 458–59, 503;
retortion, 459–60. See also war
distributive justice, 189–90
Dlugoss, Jan, 388n
domain, 301–11; desert and unculti-
vated land, 306–7; establishment
of, 213–17; extent of, 302–3; inde-
pendent families in, 310–11; inno-
cent use, right of, 326–31;
jurisdiction and, 303–5; prohibi-
tions on entering, 309; sovereignty
and, 303; treaties, settlement by,
308; usucaption and prescription,
331–38; violations of, 308–9
domestic servants: of ambassadors,
737–44; conscription of footmen,
475; luxury and surplus of, 792–93;
Queen Christina of Sweden’s exe-
cution of, 727; safe-conducts and,
635–36
donations of sovereign, 385–86
D’Orle´ans, Abbe´, 305
d’Orle´ans, Gaston, 647
drafting troops, 473–75, 500
Dreux, battle of, 201
Le droit des gens (Vattel). See Law of
Nations
drummers, ambassadorial, 702–5
Du Bellay, Martin, 700n, 725n, 798
dueling or single combat, 194–97
Duport du Tertre, Franc¸ois-Joachim,
121n, 742n, 802
Dutch. See Netherlands
duty, 751–52. See also obligations and
rights
East Indies companies, 138, 251, 539,
721
l’Ecluse, abbe´ de, 631n
economics: balance of trade, 139;
government, end or purpose of,
126–28; luxury, civic dangers of,
150–51, 788–96. See also commerce
education: happiness, obtaining, 145–
46; of youth, 146
Edward I (king of England), 254
Edward III (king of England), 120
Egeria, 160
D’Egly, Charles Philippe de Mont-
henault, 718n, 805
Egypt, 290, 426, 560n, 698n, 719n
elderly people, as enemies, 549
Eleans, 536n
elective sovereigns, 113
Elizabeth (empress of Russia), 116
Elizabeth I (queen of England), 122,
530n, 532, 711, 718, 723
embassy, 682–745; agents, deputies,
and commissioners, 693; between
allies, 686; ambassadors proper,
691; asylum in ambassador’s house,


840
index
embassy (continued )
738–40; attempts to hinder, 685–
86; authority to send, 683, 704–5;
carriages of ambassadors, 707–8n,
740–41; in civil wars, 703; com-
mencement of ambassadorial
status, 699; commerce carried on
by ambassadors, 734–35; consuls,
279–80, 693; credentials of minis-
ters, 693, 745; of enemies, 687–88;
enemies, to or through country of,
701–2; expiration of rights of,
744–45; heralds, trumpeters,
drummers, and other messengers,
702–5, 717–18; house and servants
of ambassador, 737–44; immunity
and independence of (see immu-
nity of ambassadors); indetermi-
nate character, ministers of, 692;
instructions for ministers, 693; leg-
islative assemblies, deputies sent
to, 727–29; orders of public minis-
ters for, 690–96; passage, right of,
699–701; plenipotentiary minis-
ters, 692; proxies or plenipoten-
tiaries, treaties made by, 339–40;
refusal of, 703–4; religion, minis-
ters’ right to free exercise of, 722–
23; representative character of,
690–91; resident ministers, 686–
87, 691–92; respect and honors due
to, 695–97; right of, 682–90, 693–
95; secretary of, 741; secret or non-
public ministers, 725; security of
ministers’ persons, 697–704; sover-
eigns in foreign countries, 725–27;
treaties made by subordinate pow-
ers with proper permission, 372–
73; with usurpers, 688–90; of
viceroys and regents, 685; in war,
686–88
emigration. See migration
eminent domain, 232–33, 659
empire, 308
enemies, 509–11; ambassadors and,
701–2; associates and allies of, 517–
23; clandestine seduction of, 582–
84; counterintelligence against,
580, 585; debts owed to, 511; de-
ﬁned, 509; disposition toward,
563–66; embassy from, 687–88;
faith between, 575–85; killing of,
543–49, 557–63; lying to, 577–81;
neutral ships, property found on,
532; neutral’s property found on
ships of, 533; poisoning or assassi-
nation of, 557–63; as prisoners of
war, 551–57, 606–7; promises made
by individuals to, 632–33; property
of, 510–11, 566–75; rights in just
war regarding (see obligations and
rights in just wars); terror, right to
use, 614; traitors, accepting offers
of, 584–85, 627–28; treaties be-
tween, 576–77 (see also peace trea-
ties); truces between (see truces);
whole nation as, 509–10, 612–18
England. See Britain
English Channel, French terms for,
254
enlisting troops, 473–75, 500
equality: in alliances, 348; as favorable
thing in interpretation of treaties,
434; of nations, 75, 281; in treaties,
346–48
equilibrium of powers, 496–99
equitable conditions: in disputes be-
tween nations, offering, 457; of
peace offered after declarations of
war, 502
equivocal or ambiguous expressions,
416–18, 420–21, 432–33
escheatage, 317–18
Essay on the Foundation of Natural
Law (Vattel): editions and transla-
tions, xxiii; text, 747–71; Vattel’s
theory of obligation in, xvi;
Vattel’s writing of, xi


index
841
D’Estrades, count, 665n, 707–8n, 733
ethics or moral science, deﬁned, 747–
48
Ethiopia, 315
Etrurians, 371
Etterlin, Peterman, 155n, 212n, 802
Eugenius IV (pope), 388
Eumenes of Cardia, 562
Europe: balance or equilibrium of
powers in, 496–99; conferences
and congresses, 452–53; universal
monarchy, Vattel’s fear of, 491–99.
See also speciﬁc nations
Eutropius, 584n
exchange of goods, 141–44
exchanges of prisoners, 556–57
excommunication, Catholic practice
of, 180–82
executive power: laws, execution of,
192–93; of sovereign, 187, 192–93
exile, 225–28, 307–8, 323
expletive justice, 593
external attacks, government’s duty to
protect nation against, 198–203
external obligations and rights, 74–75
external vs. internal religion, 157, 161–
62
Fabius Labeo (Quintus Fabius Labeo),
394n, 408n
Fabius Maximus (Quintus Fabius
Maximus Servilianus), 583n
Fabius Maximus (Quintus Fabius
Maximus Verrucosus), 379
faith between enemies, 575–85
faith of treaties, 386–95, 411
falsiloquy, 578
families: of ambassadors, 741; inde-
pendent, 310–11; safe-conducts for
individuals not covering, 635–36
farming: government support for,
128–31; peasants, as enemies, 550–51
Farnese, Alessandro, duke of Parma,
585n
Farouq (Farrudge; sultan of Egypt),
560n
favorable vs. odious things in inter-
pretation of treaties, 433–42
fecial law of Romans, 7, 377n
federal republics, 84
Ferdinand I (king of Aragon and
Sicily), 120
Ferdinand II (king of Aragon and
Naples) and IV (king of Castile
and Sicily), 120, 121, 215n
Ferdinand II (Holy Roman Em-
peror), 572
Ferdinand II (king of Spain), 393
feudatory states, 84
Feuquieres, Antoine de Pas, marquis
de, 580n, 806
ﬁgurative expressions in interpreta-
tion of treaties, 415–16
ﬁshing rights, 246–47, 251, 252–58
footmen, conscription of, 475. See
also domestic servants
foreign armies entering a country be-
fore declaration of war, 504
foreign countries: civil wars of other
nations, involvement in, 648–49;
embassies to (see embassy); enlist-
ment of soldiers in, 478–79, 519,
521, 527; right to dwell in, 323,
328–31; sovereigns in, 725–27; vol-
untary submission of another na-
tion to (see voluntary submission
to foreign power)
foreigners: enemy country, property
in, 510–11; reprisals, arrested as
means of, 465; reprisals in favor of,
462–63; in time of war, 505, 506n;
treatment of, 311–19, 327–31, 459–
60
foreign trade. See commerce
forgers of money, 143
formal and lawful wars, 507–8
fortresses and fortiﬁcations of enemy,
destruction of, 573


842
index
Fouget, Charles-Louis-Auguste, duc
de Belle-Isle, 616
France: Aix-la-Chapelle, treaty of,
400, 503, 568; arts and sciences,
national encouragement of, 147;
contraband goods, 529, 531, 532;
embassies to, 694–96; James II of
England, support for, 364–65;
pleasant reception of foreigners in,
331; prisoners of war, treatment of,
553; ravages of Catholicism in, 170,
177–78; regicide in, 103; religion,
sovereign’s authority in matters of,
168; sovereign succession in, 113,
119–20; sponsio of La Trimouille
with Switzerland, 381–82, 403; tax-
ation in, 231; Treaty of Madrid,
241–42; unequal alliances with
Sweden and Switzerland, 349–50;
valor, national reputation for, 200;
Vattel on rivalry between Britain
and, xviii–xix, 90; War of the Aus-
trian Succession, 425, 481n, 521n,
534n, 554, 573n, 614, 616; War of
the Polish Succession, 666; War of
the Spanish Succession, 365, 493–
94, 525; wines, British duties on, 139
Francis I (king of France), 241, 403,
405, 656–57, 699–700, 704–5, 721,
725
fraud’s adherence to terms in inter-
pretation of treaties, 426–27
Frederick I, elector of Brandenburg,
285
Frederick I (Holy Roman Emperor),
169
Frederick II (Holy Roman Emperor),
169, 181, 182, 318
Frederick III (Holy Roman Em-
peror), 255
Frederick II the Great (king of
Prussia), x, xix, 284n, 370, 802
Frederick Augustus II (elector of
Saxony), x, 525n
Frederick of Austria (king of the
Romans), 389, 552
Frederick William, elector of
Brandenburg, 329
Frederick William I (king of Prussia),
ix, 225
freedom. See liberty and
independence
Fregose (ambassador of Francis I),
699–700
French Canada, missionaries to
Hurons of, 166
Friedrich. See entries at Frederick
friendship: between nations, 267;
Vattel’s theory of obligation and,
xvi
fugitives, 225, 549
Fulstin, Herburt de, 388n
fundamental laws, 92, 101
Galatian Gauls, 522–23
Galba (Servius Sulpicius Galba,
Roman emperor), 431n
garrisoning of soldiers, 476
Gaston d’Orle´ans, 647
Gastrell, Francis, 756
Gauls, 522–23, 581n, 713
Genghis Khan, 487, 697–98n
Genoa, 614
George II (king of England), 347n
Gepidae, 329
Germanic tribes. See barbarians, and
speciﬁc tribes
Germany: Cologne, ancient inhabi-
tants of, 536n; embassy, right of,
683–85; France’s denial of embassy
from, 694; treaties, power of states
and cities to make, 339
Givry, Bailly de, 704
Glorious Revolution, 290, 364–65
glory of a nation, 203–6, 267–68
good faith: adherence to intention in
interpretation of treaties, 426–27;
with enemies, 577


index
843
Goths, 329, 572, 633
government: agriculture, encourag-
ing, 128–31; authority of body pol-
itic over its members, 81–82;
coinage, rights and duties with re-
spect to, 142–44; commerce and,
131–39; constitution and, 91–96;
dignity and majesty of state not af-
fected by form of, 282; economic
security as end or purpose of, 126–
28; external attacks, end or purpose
as protection against, 198–203;
happiness for nation, procurement
of, 145–55; interference in govern-
ment of another nation, no right
to, 289–93; ministers of state, 112;
people’s knowledge of intentions
of, 150–51; of public property, 233;
reform of, 94; sovereign (see sover-
eigns and sovereignty); toll roads,
duties regarding, 140; types of, 82–
85
governors defending enemy towns,
killing of, 546–49
Gramond, Gabriel-Barthe´lemy de,
726n, 802
granaries, public, 130–31
Gray, John de, archbishop of
Canterbury, 181n
Great Northern War, 288n, 486, 571
Greeks: enemies, debts to, 511; ene-
mies, killing of, 546; passage of
troops through neutral countries,
536; postliminium, 607; reprisals,
465; treaties of, 392–94, 417, 420,
426; wars, motives for, 486
Gregory VII (pope), 171n
Gregory IX (pope), 171n
Greiffenheim, baron, 737–38
Grotius, Hugo: on alliances, 523;
Barbeyrac’s translation of, 9; bio-
graphical information, 802–3; on
church and laws pernicious to
state, 184; on civil war, 646n; on
contraband goods, 530n, 531, 532n,
533n; on counterintelligence, 585n;
on debts of sovereign and state,
384n; on Dutch revolt, 107n, 209n,
553n; on enemies, 511n, 550; exam-
ples used by, 20; foreigners, treat-
ment of, 314n, 317n; on hostages,
401n, 406n; on killing of enemies,
544n, 546n; on law of nature and
law of nations, 7–8; on maritime
law, 250n, 251; on national responsi-
bility for actions of citizens, 301n;
on natural law, 752, 753, 754, 758,
761; on obligations and rights be-
tween nations, 273n; on passage of
troops through neutral countries,
536; on peace treaties, 668n, 676,
678; on poisoning weapons and
wells, 563n; on postliminium, 605n,
608; on property acquired by war,
594–96; on reprisals, 465; on sol-
diers acting without orders, 616n;
on sovereigns and sovereignty, 101n,
107n, 115n, 119; on surprise attacks,
579n; on treaties, 342, 345, 359, 369,
375, 379, 393, 395, 415, 433n, 440–
42; on usucaption and prescription,
332n; on war, 507; on war against
those guilty of gross transgressions
of law of nature, 265
guaranties given for observance of
treaties, 395–98, 515–16
Guicciardini, Francesco, 120, 381n, 803
Gustavus Adolphus (king of
Sweden), 350, 430, 572
Hadrian (Adrian; Roman emperor),
125
Hannibal of Carthage, 355, 455, 576
happiness: government’s duty to pro-
cure for nation, 145–55; religion
and good of state, 784–88; self-
interest and mutuality, tension be-
tween, xvi–xvii


844
index
Harcourt, count De, 742n
Harrington, Lord, 739
Hasan ibn al-Sabbah (the Old Man
of the Mountain), 559–60, 722
Heiss von Kogenheim, Johann, 182n,
803
Helvetii, 307–8, 541
Henry (infante of Portugal), 216n
Henry, landgrave of Thuringia, 182
Henry IV (king of Castile), 121
Henry V (king of England), 555–56
Henry VIII (king of England), 170n
Henry II (king of France), 389
Henry III (king of France), 156n,
170n, 504n, 728–29
Henry IV the Great (king of France):
alienation of public property re-
versed by, 238; assassination of,
156n, 170n; balance of powers,
maintaining, 497; Charles
Emmanuel I (duke of Savoy) and,
504; in civil war, 642–43, 644,
646n; embassy and, 689, 696,
709–10, 719; enemies, treatment
of, 560, 567–68; independence of
clergy and, 174n; mercenary sol-
diers of, 477; Philip II of Spain
and, 289; siege of Paris and, 263;
Vattel’s admiration for, xi, 204
Henry IV (Holy Roman Emperor),
169
Heraclius (Byzantine emperor), 721
heralds, 702–5, 717–18
Herburt, Jean, 388n
Hercules, 260, 291
hereditary or successive sovereignties,
113–22
Herodotus, 803
herring ﬁsheries off British coast, 252
highways, maintenance of, 139–41, 328
Hobbes, Thomas, 8–9, 651, 803
Holland. See Netherlands
Holy Roman Empire. See Germany,
and speciﬁc emperors
honors: of ambassadors, 695–96; of
nations or sovereigns, 281–88
Horace, 399n, 581n, 763, 803
hospitality, 313–14
hospitals for invalid soldiers, 476
hostages: for passage of troops
through neutral country, 537; for
prisoners of war, 640; treaties, as
securities for observance of, 400–
406
hostis vs. inimicus, 509
house of ambassador, 737–44
Hudson’s Bay, 255
human nature: foundation of natural
law in, 748–50; made for society,
754
Hungary, 255
Hurons, 166
immemorial prescription, 334–35, 337
immigration. See migration
immunity of ambassadors, 705–22;
asylum in ambassador’s house,
738–40; bribery, 709–10; carriages
and equipages, 740–41; civil juris-
diction, submission to, 729–37;
couriers and dispatches, 742; cus-
tomary law of nations regarding,
705, 724–25; debt, 731; dismissal or
recall of errant ministers, 711–12;
families of ambassadors, 741;
house and servants, 737–44; plots
and conspiracies, 713–19; property,
733–36; punishment of ambassa-
dors, 711–18; reprisals, 719–21; sec-
retary of embassy, 741; sovereigns
in foreign countries, 725–27; sub-
jects of state where employed as
ambassadors, 731–33; treason, min-
isters soliciting, 707–10. See also
embassy
immunity of clergy, 177–79
imperfect obligations and rights, 74–
75


index
845
import duties, 139
impossibility/possibility affecting in-
terpretation of treaties, 431–32
imposts, ambassadorial exemption
from, 723–24
inalienability of sovereignty, 115–16,
123–25
inalienable rights, 319–26
Incas, 290
indemniﬁcation: of citizens against
losses in war, 617–18; reprisals, 464
independence. See liberty and
independence
India, 131, 138, 251, 721
Indians. See Native Americans
indulgences, 184
inexhaustible things, right to use,
323–24
informal and unlawful wars, 507–8
inhabitants, natives, and citizens dis-
tinguished, 217–18
inheritance: of foreigners, 315–19; laws
of, 237; of safe-conducts, 636–37
inimicus vs. hostis, 509
injustice. See justice
Innocent III (pope), 181, 183
Innocent IV (pope), 182
Innocent X (pope), 389n
innocent use, right of, 324–31
instruments of war (armies, troops,
and commanders), 413, 472–82, 500
insurrections, 641–42. See also civil
war
intention and interpretation of trea-
ties, 421–26
internal obligations and rights, 74–75
internal police, 193–94
internal vs. external religion, 157, 161–
62
interpretation of treaties, 407–48; ab-
surdities, interpretations leading
to, 418–19, 428; ancient treaties,
413; change in state of things af-
fecting, 429–31, 436; conﬂicts with
laws or other treaties, 443–47; con-
text and intention, importance of
(“reason of the act”), 421–26; de-
grees, terms admitting of, 415, 432–
33; equivocal or ambiguous
expressions, 416–18, 420–21, 432–
33; evidently false or fanciful inter-
pretations, 408–9; favorable vs.
odious things, 433–42; ﬁgurative
expressions, 415–16; fraud’s adher-
ence to terms, 426–27; general
principles of, 407–9; good faith’s
adherence to intention, 426–27;
intentions of contracting parties,
409–10, 411–12, 414; liberality, acts
of, 442–43; mental reservations
nonadmissable, 414; nulliﬁcation,
grounds for, 419–20, 435, 440; nul-
liﬁcation, interpretations leading
to, 419–20; peace treaties, 670;
penalties, 435, 439–40; plain mean-
ing rule, 408–9, 412–14; possibility/
impossibility affecting, 431–32; real
vs. personal treaties, distinguish-
ing, 358–59; restrictive or strict,
427–29; rules for, importance of,
410–11, 448; subterfuges, 393, 408–
9; “sufﬁcient reason for an act of
the will,” 424–25; technical terms,
414–15; unforeseen cases, 431;
wording of treaties, caution in
constructing, 393
invalid soldiers, asylums for, 476
Isabella (queen of Castile), 120, 121,
215n
Isabella Clara Eugenia (regent of
Netherlands), 115n
Islam: ambassadors, respect for, 721;
Arabs, 310, 721–22; Asian con-
quests of, 265, 293; the Assassins,
559–60; ban on wine in Koran,
425; nomadic Arabs, 310; treaties,
keeping, 342, 343n. See also Turk-
ish empire


846
index
Italy, 534n, 570, 694
Ives (Ivo) de Chartres, 181
James I (king of England), 253, 291n
James II (king of England), 290,
364–65, 689
“James III” (Prince James Francis
Edward Stuart, the Young Pre-
tender), 364–65, 689–90
Jan III Sobieski (king of Poland), 263
Jane (infanta of Castile), 121
Japan, 312
Javolenus Priscus, 442n
Jean de Joinville, 744n, 803
Jeannin, president (French ambassa-
dor to Netherlands), 689, 742
Jerusalem, kingdom of, 120
Jerusalem, siege of (a.d. 10), 551–52
Jews, 273
Joan (queen of France and Navarre),
143n
Joan of Hochberg, 163n
John (prince of Bohemia), 122n
John (king of England), 181–82
John II (king of France), 143n
John II (king of Portugal), 101n
John IV de Braganza (king of
Portugal), 178–79, 609
John XXII (pope), 107n, 389
John de Gray, archbishop of
Canterbury, 181n
John-Frederick, elector of Saxony,
495n
joint property, 229
Joinville, Jean de, 744n, 803
Jose´ of Braganza, archbishop of
Braga, 179
Joseph Sofy/Soﬁ(king of Carazem),
565n, 719n
judiciary, 185–97; appointment of
judges, 187–88; authority of
judges, sovereign support for, 189;
courts, 188–89; internal police,
193–94; punishment of transgres-
sors, 190–92; supreme courts, 188–
89. See also laws
Julian the Apostate (Roman em-
peror), 163, 406
Julius Caesar, 308, 329n, 541, 546n,
550, 560n, 564, 790–91, 800
jurisdiction: civil jurisdiction, ambas-
sadorial submission to, 729–37; do-
main and, 303–5; maritime, 257;
over ambassadors, 705–7; over
lakes and rivers, 249
jus detractus, 318
justice, 185–97; distributive, 189–90;
dueling or single combat, 194–97;
establishment and enforcement
through laws, 185–86; expletive,
593; between nations, 296–98; par-
dons, 193; refusal of justice in dis-
putes between nations, 464;
sovereign’s duties with regard to,
186–89; treaty violation as act of
injustice, 343
Justinian I the Great (Byzantine em-
peror), biographical information,
803
Justinian I the Great, Digest and In-
stitutes: civil actions against ambas-
sadors, 729n; foreigners, treatment
of, 318n; on justice, 186; on law of
nature and law of nations, 6, 775n,
776; on postliminium, 611n; on
treaties, 356n, 408n, 421n, 431n,
437–38, 438n, 442n
just war: aggrandizement of neigh-
boring power, 491–99; alliances,
just cause for, 513–14; alliances only
in, 514–16; both sides, accounted as
just on, 591; both sides, war not
just on, 489–90; defensive, 487–88;
just causes of, 482–86; justiﬁcatory
reasons and motives, 483, 484–87;
just reprisals not affording cause
for, 466; lawful wars in due form,
507–8; natural law of nations on,


index
847
589–90; object of, 484; obligations
and rights in (see obligations and
rights in just wars); postliminium,
604; preparation for war, respond-
ing to, 499–500; punishment as
object of, 490
Kakesm (Khovarezm), 697n
Kandy (Ceylon), 278, 721
Kant, Immanuel, xvi
Khaled, 721
Khovarezm (Kakesm), 697n
killing: of ambassadors, 697–701; of
enemy soldiers, 543–46; of gover-
nors defending enemy towns, 546–
49; poisoning or assassination of
enemies, 557–63; of prisoners of
war, 552–56, 646; of soldiers acting
without orders, 616; of sovereign,
103, 156, 170, 178–79, 565–66, 716–
19; of spies, 582
kings. See sovereigns and sovereignty
Knights of Malta (Knights of St.
John of Jerusalem), 463, 547n
knowledge of natural law obtained
through reason, 749–50
knowledge of self, national impor-
tance of, 91
Koran: ambassadors, respect for, 721;
ban on wine in, 425
Labbe, P., 120n
Lacedaemonians. See Sparta and
Spartans
Lacombe, Jacques, 566n, 803
la Croix, Petis de, 98n, 414n, 560n,
565n, 719n
Ladislaus or Uladislaus (king of
Naples), 255
lakes, 242, 247–49
Lancellotti, Giovanni Paolo, 176n,
804
La Pimpie Solignac, Pierre-Joseph de,
388n, 804
Lars Porsenna, 404, 558
La Trimouille (La Tre´moille), Louis I
de, viscount of Thouars, 381–82,
403
Laupen, battle of, 201
la Valette, Cardinal De, 474–75n
la Vega, Garcillaso de, 290n, 801
lawful wars in due form, 507–8
law of nations: basic principles of,
17–19, 67–79; conventional (see
treaties and conventions); custom-
ary (see customary law of nations);
deﬁned, 67–69; necessary (see nec-
essary law of nations); positive, 78;
on private persons in just war, 612–
13; small states, defense of sover-
eignty of, xix; treaty violation as
violation of, 387–91; Vattel’s appli-
cation of theory of natural law to,
xiii–xix, 5 (see also natural law of
nations); Vattel’s study of, x; Vattel’s
writings on, importance of, ix,
xix–xx; voluntary (see voluntary
law of nations)
The Law of Nations (Vattel): eco-
nomic reform theory in, xvii–xviii;
editions and translations of, xin10,
xxi–xxii, 2; examples, use of, 19–
20; mutual aid and self-interest,
tension between, xvi–xvii (see also
mutuality, self-interest vs.); signiﬁ-
cance of, ix, xix–xx; Vattel’s appli-
cation of theory of natural law to
law of nations in, xiii–xix; Vattel’s
writing of, xi
law of nature. See natural law; natu-
ral law of nations
laws: Catholicism productive of laws
and customs pernicious to state,
184–85; civil, 92–93; of commerce,
132–36, 144; conﬂict of laws or
treaties, 443–47; constitution and,
92–93; criminal, 191–92; deﬁned,
747; enforcement of, 186; execu-


848
index
laws (continued )
tion of, 192–93; fecial law of
Romans, 7, 377n; foreigners subject
to, 312–13; fundamental, 92, 101;
inheritance, 237; justice established
through, 185–86; on migration,
222–23, 224; military, 479–80; obe-
dience to, 93; political, 92, 773–81;
on property, 232; Roman marriage
laws, 175; of the seas (see maritime
law); sovereign and, 101–9. See also
judiciary; justice
l’Ecluse, abbe´ de, 631n
Lee, Sir George, 304n
legislative assemblies, deputies sent
to, 727–29
legislative power and right to change
constitution, 94–95
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, x, 122,
183n, 205, 239n, 759, 763–71, 804
Leo X (pope), 172
Leonidas (Spartan leader), 559
Leopold, duke of Austria, 564
Leslie, John, bishop of Ross, 718
Leszcyn´ski, Stanislaw, 666n
Le Tellier, Franc¸ois-Michel, marquis
de Louvois, 494
letters, men of, as enemies, 550
letters of marque, 462
Letters Rogatory, 300
Leutrum, Karl Sigismond Friedrick
Wilhelm, 547, 616
Le Vassor, Michel, 291n, 804
levying troops, 473–75, 500
Lewis. See entries at Louis
liberality, interpretation of treaties in-
volving acts of, 442–43
liberty and independence, 74; ambas-
sadorial immunity (see immunity
of ambassadors); ambassadorial
right to free exercise of religion,
722–23; deﬁnition of nation as free
persons living together in state of
nature, 68; as favorable thing in in-
terpretation of treaties, 434; infrac-
tions, right to suppress, 77;
philosophical discussion, freedom
of, 147–49; religion and liberty of
conscience, 157, 161; trade, freedom
of, 274; unjustly conquered peo-
ple, freeing of, 603; Vattel’s belief
in importance of, xvii–xviii
lies, 390–91, 577–81
Lisbon earthquake, 264
Livy (Titus Livius): biographical in-
formation, 804; on conquest,
601n; on declarations of war, 501;
on embassy, 713n, 715; on killing of
enemies, 545n, 558n; necessity,
right of, 321n; on peace treaties,
660n; stratagems and artiﬁces in
war, 581; on treaties, 371, 374, 376,
394, 404n, 406n; on truces, 629n;
on voluntary submission to foreign
power, 208n; on war, 484n
Lockhart, Sir William, 689
Loisir Philosophique (Vattel), 186n
Longueville, Madame de, 117n, 120n,
305
Louis, duke of Anjou, 717–18
Louis VI the Fat (king of France),
97n
Louis VII (king of France), 97n
Louis VIII (king of France), 182–83n
Louis IX (St. Louis; king of France),
722
Louis XI (king of France), 205, 548n,
634n, 690
Louis XII (king of France), 99, 153,
341, 381–82
Louis XIII (king of France), 291n,
348n, 646n, 647, 657n
Louis XIV (king of France): Algiers,
bombardment of, 570n; Breda,
treaty of, terms for English Chan-
nel used in, 254; Charles II of
Spain and, 493–94; contributions
from enemies, 569; Cromwell’s


index
849
form of address to, 285n; dueling
outlawed by, 194; on embassy,
707–8n; Netherlands and, 263,
272, 430, 457; on sovereignty, 102;
War of the Spanish Succession
and, 364–66, 493–94, 524; written
requirements for debts under, 779–
80
Louis XV (king of France), 103n, 147,
458, 666n, 696
Louis IV of Bavaria (Holy Roman
Emperor), 122, 169–70, 389
Louvois, Franc¸ois-Michel Le Tellier,
marquis de, 494
love: of country, encouraging, 152–55;
between nations, mutuality of, 267
Low Countries. See Netherlands
Lucretius (Titus Lucretius Carus),
169n, 804
Ludwig, marquis of Brandenburg,
122n
Ludwig IV (Holy Roman Emperor),
122n
Lupfen, count of, 327
Luxembourg, duke of, 580
luxury: of Catholic clergy, 180; civic
dangers of, 150–51, 788–96; de-
ﬁned, 788; social mobility and,
793–94
Lycurgus, 146
lying, 390–91, 577–81
Lyons, council of, 182
Lysunder, 545n
Machiavelli, Nicolo`, 289, 480, 804
Madrid, treaty of, 241–42, 403, 657
Magellan, Straits of, 255
Magnus Pius (Sextus Pompey), 668
Mahomet. See entries at Muhammad,
Muhammed
Maine, Henry Summer, 304n
Mairargues (French ofﬁcer), 710, 719
“Majesty,” as title, 285–86
Malta, siege of, 547
Maltese Knights (Knights of St. John
of Jerusalem), 463, 547n
manifestos declaring war, 500–506
Manlius (Gnaeus Manlius Vulso),
394, 522–23, 616
Mansﬁeld, Lord (Mr. Murray), 304n
Maraviglia (secret minister of Francis
I), 725
Marcus Aurelius (Roman emperor),
xi, 125
Margaret, duchess of Karinthia, 122n
Mariana, Juan de, 103–4n, 106n,
114n, 231n, 804
Maria Theresa (queen of Hungary
and empress of Austria), 521, 525n,
554, 658n
Marie de Medicis (regent of France),
291n
Marigny, Franc¸ois Augier de, 698n,
798
maritime law, 249–58; children born
at sea, citizenship of, 219; coastal
seas, 252–58; jurisdiction, 257; neu-
tral ships, searching of, 532–33;
possession of or dominion over
open seas, 249–52; privateers, 614–
15. See also piracy
Marius (Gaius Marius), 564
marriage: of aliens, 319; of prisoners
of war, 611; women, right to carry
off, 321–22
Martin I (king of Aragon) and II
(king of Sicily), 120
Martin IV (pope), 183n
Mary (queen of Scots), 718, 727
Matthieu, Pierre, 719n, 805
Maurice, prince of Orange, 579n,
702n
Maximilian I (elector of Bavaria),
572
Maximilian I (Holy Roman Em-
peror), 341, 381n
Mazarin, Cardinal, 689
mediation, 450–51, 648–49, 662


850
index
Medicis, Marie de (regent of France),
291n
Mediterranean Sea, 257
mental reservations nonadmissable in
interpretation of treaties, 414
mercenary soldiers, 476–79
merchants. See commerce
messengers, ambassadorial, 702–5
Methuen, treaty of, 137n
Mexico, 672–73, 700, 721
Me´zeray, Franc¸ois Eudes de, 110n,
201, 241n, 242n, 283, 341n, 721n,
728n, 805
migration: allowing or disallowing
citizens to quit country, 220–25;
exile or banishment, 225–28, 307–
8, 323; of individuals, 127, 198–
200, 220–25, 328–29; nomadic
peoples, 220, 310–11; of peoples,
220, 307–8, 328–29; tax on, 221n.
See also colonization
military actions during truces, 624–
28
military discipline, 480, 615–16
military prowess, national cultivation
of, 201
military troops, 472–82; acting with-
out orders, 615–16; allies, provided
to, 513; booty, 568–69; foreign
countries, levying of troops in,
478–79, 519, 521, 527; fugitives and
deserters, 549; luxury, dangers of,
790–91; mercenaries, 476–79; neu-
tral states, passage through, 534–41;
ofﬁcers, 480–82, 615; retreat during
truce, 626–27; standing armies,
476, 500; volunteers, 615
militia of Switzerland, 500
ministers of religion. See clergy
ministers of state. See public
ministers
Mirabeau, Victor Riqueti de, xviii
missionaries: China, missionaries
driven from, 174; French Canada,
missionaries to Hurons of, 166;
persuasion, right of, 294
Mithridates (king of Armenia), 394
Modestinus, 331
Mohammed. See entries at
Muhammad, Muhammed
Molesworth, Robert, viscount, 539n,
805
monarchs. See sovereigns and
sovereignty
monasteries, 175, 199–200, 475
money, 141–44
monopolies, 138, 278–79
Montaigne, Michel de, 793, 796, 805
Montesquieu, Charles-Louis de
Secondat, baron de la Bre`de et de,
xviii, 116n, 175n, 185n, 304n, 600n,
805
Montezuma (Aztec emperor), 673
Montgon, Charles Alexandre de,
739n, 805
Monthenault D’Egly, Charles
Philippe de, 718n, 805
Montmollin, Marie de, ix
Montpensier, Franc¸ois, duc de, 646
moral persons, nations as, 67, 85
moral science or ethics, deﬁned, 747–
48
Morat, battle of, 201
mortgages given for observance of
treaties, 398
Mortgarten, battle of, 201
motives for war, 483, 484–87
Mucius Scaevola (Gaius Mucius
Scaevola), 558
Muffelburgh, battle of, 546n
Muhammad II (sultan), 413
Muhammed Cotheddin (sultan of
Khovarezm), 697–98n
Muhammed the Prophet, 343n
Murad (Amurath) II (sultan), 388
Murray, Mr. (later Lord Mansﬁeld),
304n
Muslims. See Islam


index
851
mutuality: of love and friendship be-
tween nations, 267; self-interest
vs., xvi–xvii, 73–74; treaties dis-
solved by mutual consent, 371–72
Natalis, Alexander (Alexandre Noel),
171n, 805
nations, 81–85; alienation of part of,
240–42; citizens, actions by and
against, 298–301; conquest, owner-
ship of, 602–3; conquest of entire
state, 608–9; constitutions of, 91–
96; countries vs., 153–54 (see also
countries); deﬁned, 67, 68, 81;
equality and dignity of, 75, 281; es-
tablishment of a nation in a coun-
try, 213–17 (see also domain); exiled
or banished persons, duties to-
ward, 227–28; external attacks, pre-
venting, 198–203; as free persons
living together in state of nature,
68; glory of, 203–6, 267–68; gov-
ernment of (see government); in-
dependence from another state of
which it is a member, obtaining,
210–12; indivisibility of sovereignty
of, 117–18; law of (see law of na-
tions; natural law of nations); lib-
erty and independence of (see
liberty and independence); as
moral persons, 67, 85; obligations
and rights between (see obligations
and rights between nations); obli-
gations and rights toward them-
selves, 85–91 (see also obligations
and rights); power relative to other
nations, 202–3; religion, public es-
tablishment of, 157–59; self-
determination of actions not
affecting rights of other nations,
75; self-knowledge, importance of,
91; self-love, encouraging, 152–55;
self-preservation and perfection as
duties of, 86–91; small states, de-
fense of sovereignty of, xix; sover-
eigns, national obligations and
rights invested in, 99; sovereignty
or dependence of, 83–85; strength
of, 198–200; submission to foreign
power, voluntary (see voluntary
submission to foreign power); ti-
tles, honors, rank, and precedence,
281–88; wealth of, 201–2, 228–29,
788–96
Native Americans: ambassadors, re-
spect for, 700, 721; Aztecs, Spanish
conquest of, 672–73; colonization
of lands of, 216–17, 310; French
Canada, missionaries to Hurons
of, 166; Incan empire, Spanish in-
terference in, 290
natives, citizens, and inhabitants dis-
tinguished, 217–18
naturalization, 218
natural law, 747–71; deﬁned, 69–70n,
747; human nature, foundation in,
748–50; Leibniz’s critique of
Pufendorf and Barbeyrac’s response
to, 763–71; obligation of, 750–61;
perfection via, 773–81; reason,
knowledge of natural law obtained
through, 749–50; self-interest as
basis for obligation of, 753–63; so-
ciety between persons and nations
formed by, 71–73, 261–62; treaties
regarding things already due by,
345–46; universality of, 775; usu-
caption and prescription estab-
lished by, 332–36; Vattel’s
application to law of nations, xiii–
xix, 5 (see also natural law of na-
tions); Vattel’s study of, x; Vattel’s
writings on, importance of, ix; will
of God and foundations of, 749,
758–61, 763–71
natural law of nations, 68–69; de-
ﬁned, 69–70n; disputes, means of
settling, 450–52; embassy, immu-


852
index
natural law of nations (continued )
nity and independence of, 705–7,
721–22; as foundation of obliga-
tions and rights between nations,
259–62; on neutrality and neutral
states, 526; obligation of nation to
act according to its nature, 85–86;
society formed by, 72–73; unequal
treaties conformable with, 354–55;
usucaption and prescription, 336;
Vattel’s theory of, xiii–xix, 5; on
war, 589–90
natural resources, right to use, 323–24
navigation, rights of, 246–47, 251
necessary law of nations, 16–17, 70–
71; deﬁned, 70; immutability of,
70; lawful vs. unlawful treaties or
conventions and, 70–71; positive
law distinguished, 78; voluntary
law distinguished, 78–79; on war,
589
necessity, right of, 320–22
Negropont, 413
Nemours, Madame de, 117n, 120n, 305
Nepesinians, 371
Nerva (Roman emperor), 125
Netherlands: ambassadorial exemp-
tion from imposts in, 723–24; arbi-
tration between subjects and
sovereigns in, 109; commerce of,
131, 138, 278, 280; contraband
goods, 529, 530n; Louis XIV and,
263, 272, 430, 457; maritime treaty
with Austria, 251; neutrality and
use of ports, 526n; papal protec-
tion of Dutch ships, 268; police
in, 194; ranking and precedence of
nations, effect of form of govern-
ment on, 282; regency of Isabella
Clara Eugenia, 115n; religious toler-
ation in, 162; reprisals by Britain in
favor of Knights of Malta, 463;
Spain, revolt against, 104, 107n,
209n, 533, 544n, 553n, 585n, 618n,
642–43, 703; subjects of state
where employed as ambassadors,
732–33; War of the Austrian Suc-
cession, 521
Neufchaˆtel (modern-day Neuchaˆtel):
arbitration between subjects and
sovereigns in, 109; embassy, right
of, 684; guardianship of Madame
de Longueville, 305; reformed reli-
gion embraced in, 163n; subject to
Prussian prince but not part of
Prussia, 84; succession to sover-
eignty in, 117n, 120; Vattel and, xi–
xiii, xix
Neugebauer (Polish historian), 388n
neutrality and neutral states, 523–41;
acts done with view to self-interest
and without partiality, 526–28;
commerce with states at war, 528–
34; conduct regarded as neutral,
523–24; declarations of war, 505–6;
deﬁned, 523; hostilities against,
539–40; impartiality, duty of, 533–
34; natural law of nations on, 526;
obligation to give succor and, 524;
passage of troops through, 534–41;
postliminium in, 605; prisoners of
war escaping into, 610; property
found with enemies, 510; right of,
524–25; searching of neutral ships,
532–33; treaties of, 525–26
Nevers, Louis de Gonzage, duc de,
719n, 805
New England, Puritans in, 216–17
Newton, Isaac, 147, 205
Nicholas V (pope), 216n
Nickolls, John (Louis-Joseph Plumard
de Danguel), 132n, 806
Nimeguen, peace of, 662
Noel, Alexandre (Alexander Natalis),
171n, 805–6
nomads, 310–11
noncombatants as enemies, treatment
of, 510, 549–51


index
853
Norway, 288n, 539
Novara, battle of, 84n4
Numa, 160
Nuremberg, burgrave of, 327
oaths: of soldiers, 479; treaties, use
in, 390–92
obedience to sovereigns, 109
obligations and rights, 73–74; active
and passive obligation, 751–52; ba-
sis for, 766; civil war, sovereign in,
641, 642–44; constitutional, 91–96;
deﬁnition of obligation, 750–53;
duty and, 751–52; external vs. in-
ternal, 74–75; inalienable rights,
319–26; in just wars (see obligations
and rights in just wars); law of na-
tions and, 67–68; Leibniz’s critique
of Pufendorf and Barbeyrac’s re-
sponse to, 763–71; between nations
(see obligations and rights between
nations); of nation toward itself,
85–91; natural law, obligation of,
750–61; of neutrality, 524–25; per-
fect vs. imperfect, 74–75, 297; of
prisoners of war, 610–11; self-
determination of national actions
not affecting rights of other na-
tions, 75; self-interest as basis for,
753–63; silence, loss of rights by,
210; of soldiers, 479–80; of sover-
eigns, 96–112; Vattel’s theory of,
xvi; war, right of making, 469–71;
will of God and foundations of
natural law, 749, 758–61, 763–71
obligations and rights between na-
tions: ancients’ ignorance of, 273;
citizens, actions by and against,
298–301; commerce, right of, 274–
75; compelling assistance from an-
other nation, 266; difference of
religion, effects of, 268; disputes,
settlement of (see disputes between
nations, settling); domain, effect
of, 301–11; embassy, right of, 682–
90, 693–95; foreigners, treatment
of, 311–19, 327–31; foundations of,
259–61; inalienable rights, 319–26;
injury or offense to other nations,
avoiding, 271–72; innocent use,
right of, 324–31; interference in
government of another nation, no
right to, 289–93; justice, 296–98;
in just wars (see obligations and
rights in just wars); limitations due
to present state of humanity, 268–
71; love between nations, mutual-
ity of, 267; passage (see passage,
right of); peace treaties, observa-
tion of, 671–73; perfection of oth-
ers, contributing to, 264–65;
preservation of others, assisting,
262–64; requiring assistance from
another nation, 266; security, right
of, 288–95; titles, honors, rank,
and precedence, 281–88; treaties,
obligation to observe terms of,
342–43 (see also treaties and con-
ventions); unequal treaties, 352–53;
usucaption and prescription, 331–
38
obligations and rights in just wars,
541–75; disposition toward ene-
mies, 563–66; faith between ene-
mies, 575–85; killing of enemy,
543–49, 557–63; noncombatants as
enemies, treatment of, 510, 549–51;
person of the enemy, 541–66; post-
liminium, 603–11; prisoners of
war, 551–57, 606–7, 610–11; private
persons, 612–18; property of the
enemy, 566–75; reprisals, 543–44;
right of making war, 469–71; safe-
conducts, 635
Ockley, Simon, 343n, 721n, 722n, 806
odious vs. favorable things in inter-
pretation of treaties, 433–42
offensive alliances, 512, 519


854
index
offensive war, 471, 488–89, 503
ofﬁcers, military, 480–82, 615
older people, as enemies, 549
the Old Man of the Mountain
(Hasan ibn al-Sabbah), 559–60,
722
open seas. See maritime law
D’Orle´ans, Abbe´, 305
d’Orle´ans, Gaston, 647
Orle´ans, Philippe II, duc d’, 714–15
Orte, governor of Bayonne, 110
Ossat, Arnauld d’, 174n, 806
Otho IV (Holy Roman Emperor), 181
Ovid (Publius Ovidius Naso), 3n,
806
Oxenstierna, Axel, 205
papacy. See Catholicism, and individ-
ual popes
Papon, Jean, 177n, 806
pardon, 193
Paris, Matthew, 182n
Paris, siege of, 263
Pas, Antoine de, marquis de
Feuquie`res, 580n, 806
passage, right of, 322–23, 327–28; am-
bassadors, 699–701; military troops
passing through neutral states,
534–41; property/merchandise,
327–28; safe-conducts in war, 633–
37
passive and active obligation, 751–52,
766
passports, 633–34, 699–701
Patkul, General, 222n
patrimonial sovereignty, 123–26
patriotism: importance of encourag-
ing, 152–55; Vattel’s concept of, xix
Paul, Dr., 304n
Paul III (pope), 177
Paul V (pope), 172
peace, 651–55; deﬁned, 651–52; effects
of, 655; end of war as, 655; obliga-
tion to cultivate, 652–54; post-
liminium, 609–10; treaties of (see
peace treaties)
peace treaties, 655–81; alienation of
property in, 657–59; alliances and,
675, 677, 680–81; allies and associ-
ates, 661–62; amnesties as part of,
664; authority to make, 655–57,
659–60; binding nature of, 671;
breaches of, 673–81; citizens or
subjects violating, 680; commence-
ment of obligations under, 665–
67; compromise as, 662–64;
contributions, cessation of, 668;
deﬁned, 655; effects of, 663–64; ex-
ecution of, 665–71; former treaties,
incorporation of, 665; interpreta-
tion of, 670; invalidity of, 667,
681; mediation of, 662; new cause
for war and, 674, 675–76; obliga-
tion to observe, 672–73; obstacles
to implementing, 667, 679–80;
penalties for violating, 679; prop-
erty restored in, 668–69; publica-
tion of, 666–67; self-defense no
breach of, 676–77; single article
violated as violation of whole
treaty, 678–79; studied delays, 679;
terms of, 663–65; with usurpers,
660–61
peasants, as enemies, 550–51
Pecquet, Antoine, 709, 806
Pedius (Quintus Pedius), 356
penalties: enemy property taken by
way of, 567–68; peace treaties, vio-
lation of, 679; in treaties, interpre-
tation of, 435, 439–40; truces,
violation of, 622–23. See also
punishment
Penn, William, 217
Pentherrieder, 284n
Pepin the Younger (king of the
Franks), 558
perfection: constitution as means of,
92; contribution of other nations


index
855
to, 264–65, 267; happiness of na-
tion, encouraging, 151–52; nation,
as aim of, 86, 88–89; natural law
and political laws, 773–81; obliga-
tions and rights, perfect, 74–75,
297; society, as aim of, 73; sover-
eign’s duty to perfect nation, 99–
100; of treaties, 360; war, not an
argument for, 265
Pericles, 394, 417
perjury, 390–91
Peronne, interview at, 634–35n
Perseus (king of Macedonia), 581
personal treaties and alliances, 355,
362–64
Peter III (king of Aragon), 183n, 552
Peter II (king of Portugal), 179n
Peter I the Great (emperor of Russia),
147, 285, 288, 315, 486, 555, 571
Pharos, 426
Philip (archduke of Austria), 341
Philip, duke of Burgundy, 389
Philip, son of Antony the Bastard of
Burgundy, 548n
Philip I (king of Castile), 393n
Philip II Augustus (king of France),
475n
Philip III the Bold (king of France),
183n
Philip IV the Fair (king of France),
143n, 171
Philip II (king of Spain), 104, 107n,
115n, 289, 384n, 609, 618n, 711–12
Philip V of Anjou (king of Spain),
365, 531n
Philip de Valois, 119, 142n, 183
Philip of Macedon, 486
Philippe II, duc d’Orle´ans, 714–15
Philippe de Commines, 205, 682, 801
Philippe-Henri, marquis de Se´qur,
481n
philosophical discussion, freedom of,
147–49
Phyton, 546
piety, 155–56. See also religion
pillaging, 568–69
Pineau-Duclos, Charles, 341n, 548n,
806
piracy: citizens, national responsibil-
ity for actions of, 301; contraband
goods and, 531n; as informal and
unlawful war, 507; papal protec-
tion of Dutch ships, 268; priva-
teers, 614–15; property acquired by,
596; ravaging of North African
hideouts by Spain and Italy, 570
Pius II (pope), 121
Pius V (pope), 172, 177
plain meaning rule for interpretation
of treaties, 408–9, 412–13
pledges given for observance of trea-
ties, 398–400
plenipotentiaries: ambassadorial min-
isters, 692; treaties made by, 339–40
Pliny the Younger (Gaius Plinius
Caecilius Secundus), 781, 806
plots, ambassadorial, 713–19
Plumard de Danguel, Louis-Joseph
(John Nickolls), 132n, 807
Plutarch (Mestrius Plutarchus), 379n,
533n, 536n, 558n, 807
poisoning of enemies, 557–63
Poland, 263, 530n, 596–97, 666
police, internal, 193–94
political law, 92, 773–81
Polybius, 301n, 486, 807
Pompey, 668n, 791
Pomponius (Titus Pomponius
Atticus), 317–18
pontifex maximus, choice of, 168
popular commotions, 641. See also
civil war
population of country, encouraging,
127, 198–200
Porsenna (Lars Porsenna), 404, 558
ports, 255
Portugal: attempted assassination of
John de Braganza, 178–79; com-


856
index
Portugal (continued )
merce of, 137n, 138, 274; division
of New World between Spain and
Portugal by papacy, 215; Lisbon
earthquake, 264; open seas, appro-
priation of, 250; rules of sovereign
succession in, 116; Spanish con-
quest and reversal, 609, 703
port wine trade between Britain and
Portugal, 137n
positive law of nations, 78
possession as 9/10ths of law, 457
possibility/impossibility affecting in-
terpretation of treaties, 431–32
postliminium, 603–11, 628
power of the purse, 230
Praetorian Edict, 780, 781n
Pragmatic Sanction, 397
Prague, siege of, 616
precedence of nations or sovereigns,
281–88
preparation for war, responding to,
499–500
prescription, 331–38
pretexts for war, 486–87
Pre´vost, Antoine Franc¸ois, 721n,
807
princes. See sovereigns and
sovereignty
prisoners of war, 551–57; in civil wars,
646; concealed property of, 640;
death before ransom, 638–39, 640;
exchanges, 556–57; hostages for,
640; killing of, 552–56, 646; mar-
riage of, 611; neutral states, escap-
ing into, 610; peace treaties,
authority to make, 659–60; post-
liminium, 606–7, 610–11; promises
made to enemies by, 633n; ransom
of, 556–57, 637–40; as slaves, 556–
57; wills of, 611; women and chil-
dren as, 551
private contracts made by sovereign,
382–86
private enemies, 509
privateers, 614–15. See also piracy
private persons’ obligations and
rights in war, 612–18
private property, 229, 236–37; do-
main, as part of, 302–3; of foreign-
ers, 315–19; reprisals involving, 461;
war, acquisition by, 598
private war, 469
Privernians, 601
Probus (Marcus Aurelius Probus, Ro-
man emperor), 328
Procopius of Caesarea, 633
property, 228–37; alienation (see
alienation of property); ambassa-
dorial, 733–36; common property,
229, 232, 233–36; contraband
goods, 505, 529–32; disposal of by
sovereign, 659; eminent domain,
232–33; of enemies, 510–11, 566–75;
joint property, 229; laws govern-
ing, 232; national wealth, 201–2,
228–29, 788–96; necessity, right of,
320–22; of neutral parties, 529–32;
passage, right of, 327–28; peace
treaty, restoration by, 668–69;
pledges given for observance of
treaties, 398–400; possession as
9/10ths of law, 457; postliminium,
603–11; private (see private prop-
erty); public (see public property);
right to use everything in primitive
state, 320; safe-conducts covering,
635; of unjustly conquered people,
603; unowned things, national
right to appropriate, 307; usucap-
tion and prescription, 331–38; war,
acquisitions by, 568–69, 593–603.
See also domain
prostitution, as metaphor for bad
government, 151
protection of a foreign power, na-
tions submitting to. See voluntary
submission to foreign power


index
857
proxies, treaties made by, 339–40
Prussia, 162, 304, 480, 596–97
publications: declarations of war,
500–506, 522–23; of peace treaties,
666–67; of truces, 621–22
public enemies, 509
public ministers: ambassadorial (see
embassy); deﬁned, 682–83; sover-
eign authority over, 112
public property: acquisition of, 229;
alienation of, 237–40; deﬁned,
228–29; eminent domain, 232–33;
government of, 233; laws govern-
ing, 232; preservation and repair
of, 235–36; sovereign’s authority
over, 229–30; use of, 233–36
public war, 469
public ways, 139–41, 328
Pufendorf, Samuel: biographical in-
formation, 807; examples used by,
20; on law of nature and law of
nations, 9; on natural law, 752, 753,
755, 759n, 762n, 763, 771; on
promises made by individuals to
enemies, 633n; on sovereigns and
sovereignty, 119; on treaties, 360,
361, 381, 414n, 417n, 426n, 433n,
445; Vattel’s study of, x
punishment: of ambassadors, 711–18;
injustice, right of punishing, 297;
just war, as object of, 490; retalia-
tion by one nation against another,
458–59, 503; security rights of na-
tions and right of, 289; of trans-
gressors, 190–92; unequal treaties
as means of, 354–55. See also
penalties
Puritans in New England, 216–17
purse, power of, 230
Pyrrhus (king of Epirus and Mac-
edon), 561
quarter, giving or refusing to give,
543–44
Quintilian (Marcus Fabius
Quintilianus), 434n, 807
Quintus Aemilius Papus, 561
Quintus Curtius Rufus, 562n, 600n,
801
rank of nations or sovereigns, 281–88
ransom of prisoners, 556–57, 637–40
rape of the Sabine women, 321
ravaging of enemy property, 570–73
Ravaillac (assassin of Henry IV of
France), 156
Raymond, count of Toulouse, 182–83n
real treaties and alliances, 355–59,
364–65
reason, knowledge of natural law ob-
tained through, 749–50
“reason of the act” in interpretation
of treaties, 421–26
Rebmann, Hans Rudolf, 155n, 807
refugees, 225
regents, 117
regicide, 103, 156, 170, 178–79, 716–19
Regulus, 660
religion, 155–85; abuse of, 166; ambas-
sadorial right to free exercise of,
722–23; atheism, 765–66; Catholic
(see Catholicism); changing pub-
licly established religion, 163–64;
deﬁned, 157; difference of religion
and relationship between nations,
268; general truces between Turks
and Christians, 619; happiness and
good of state, 784–88; interference
with government of another na-
tion on grounds of, 291, 292–95;
internal vs. external, 157, 161–62;
liberty of conscience, 157, 161;
ministers of (see clergy); missioniz-
ing (see missionaries); nations,
rights and obligations of, 157–59;
piety, 155–56; public establishment
of, 157–59, 160–61, 163–64; sover-
eigns, rights and duties of, 159–70,


858
index
religion (continued )
787; superstition vs., 148–49; toler-
ation of, 162; treaties between par-
ties not professing the same faith,
342, 392; will of God and founda-
tions of natural law, 749–50, 758–
61, 763–71
renunciation of sovereignty: national
allegiance to sovereign, renounc-
ing, 210–12; by sovereign, 115–16
reparations, 289, 458
reprisals, 460–67, 545–46, 719–21
republics: ranking and precedence of
nations, effect of form of govern-
ment on, 282; as type of govern-
ment, 82–85; Vattel’s views on,
473n
res communes, 228. See also public
property
resistance, right of, 101n, 103–12, 288–
89
restrictive or strict interpretation of
treaties, 427–29
retaliation, 458–59, 503
retinue. See domestic servants
retortion, 459–60
Rhadamanthus, law of, 458
Rhadamistus (king of Iberia and
Armenia), 394
Rhodians, 426
Ricci, Pierro Andrea, 177n
Richelieu, Cardinal, 348n, 349–50,
430, 475, 654n, 726n
rights. See obligations and rights
Rincon (ambassador of Francis I),
699–700
Ripperda, duke de, 739
rivers and streams, 242–47, 249, 323–
24
roads, maintenance of, 139–41, 328
robbers, treatment of enemies waging
unlawful war as, 508
Robert II (king of Scotland), 390
Rohan, Henri, duc de, 646n, 808
Romans: aggrandizing powers, failure
to address, 496; arts and sciences,
national encouragement of, 147;
on assassination, 561; barbarians
admitted to empire, 328–29; booty,
569; Carthage, foreign commerce
with, 131; Carthage, treaties with,
351–52, 354–55, 440–42, 660;
Carthage, wars with, 354–55, 455,
576, 660; conquests of, 598, 601–2;
education of youth, 146; embassy,
710, 713, 715, 729–30, 742; fecial
law, 7, 377n; foreigners, treatment
of, 317–18; on law of nature and
law of nations, 5–7; marriage, laws
encouraging, 175; military disci-
pline of, 616; peace treaties of, 660;
pontifex maximus, choice of, 168;
postliminium among, 606, 611;
promises made by individuals to
enemies, 633; ranking and prece-
dence of nations, effect of form of
government on, 282; sponsio, 374–
82; standing army, dangers of, 500;
stratagems and artiﬁces in war,
580–81; treaties of, 394; truces, 629;
voluntary submission of nation to
foreign power of, 208; wars of, 485,
488, 613; women, right to carry off,
321–22
Roˆny, marquis De, 743–44
Roques, Pierre, x
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, xii–xiii, xviii
Royal Academy of Sciences, 147
royalty. See sovereigns and
sovereignty
Russia: arts and sciences, national en-
couragement of, 147; embassy in,
724, 737–38; foreigners, treatment
of, 315; Great Northern War, 288n,
486, 571; rules of sovereign succes-
sion in, 116; Schwedt, treaty of,
596–97
Ruyter, Michiel de, 205


index
859
Ryder, Sir Dudley, 304n
Ryswick, treaty of, 662
Sabine women, rape of, 321
sacredness or faith of treaties, 386–95,
411
safe-conducts, 633–37
safeguards granted to enemy prop-
erty, 573
St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre, 110
St. Jacques, battle of, 205–6
St. John of Jerusalem, Knights of
(Knights of Malta), 463, 547n
St. Philippe, marquis de (Vicente
Bacallar y Sanna, marquis de San
Felipe), 284n, 387n, 658n, 798
Saint-Pierre, Abbe´ de, xviii
Salic law (succession through male
line only), 113
Samnites, 374–82, 482, 488
1 Samuel 19–20, 112n
San Felipe, Vicente Bacallar y Sanna,
marquis de (marquis de St.
Philippe), 284n, 387n, 658n, 798
Sapor I (king of Persia), 394–95
Sarnicki, S., 388n
Saul (biblical king), 111–12
Sauvage, Matthew, 717–18
Saxony in Great Northern War, 288n
Schodeler, Wernher, 155n, 808
scholars, as enemies, 550
Schwedt, treaty of, 596–97
sciences, national encouragement of,
146–47
Scipio Aemilianus (Publius Cornelius
Scipio Aemilianus), 441, 545, 785
Scipio Africanus (Publius Cornelius
Scipio Africanus Major), 354–55,
406
Scotland, 106–7n, 390, 546n, 718, 727
Scythians, 314, 600
searching of neutral ships, 532–33
seas, law of. See maritime law
secretary of embassy, 741
secret or non-public ambassadors,
725
security: of ambassadors, 697–704;
for passage of troops, 536–37; pass-
ports, 633–34; right of, 288–95;
safe-conducts, 633–37
security given for observance of trea-
ties, 395–406; antichresis, 398;
guaranties, 395–98, 515–16; hos-
tages, 400–406; mortgages, 398;
pledges, 398–400
sedition, 641
seduction of enemies, clandestine,
582–84
Sejanus (Lucius Aelius Sejanus), 426–
27
Selden, John, 250n, 253n, 254, 808
self-interest: love of country (self-
love), promoting, 152–55; mutual-
ity vs., xvi–xvii, 73–74; nation’s
obligation to preserve itself and its
members, 86–88; neutral states act-
ing with view to self-interest and
without partiality, 526–28; obliga-
tion of natural law, as basis for,
753–63; peace treaty not breached
by acts of self-defense, 676–77;
sovereign’s duty to promote self-
preservation of nation, 99–100;
treaties conﬂicting with, 345–46
self-knowledge, 91, 100
Selim I (Turkish sultan), 698n
selling, right of, 133
Sempach, battle of, 155, 201
Seneca (Lucius Annaeus Seneca),
427n, 808
Se´qur, Philippe-Henri, marquis de,
481n
servants. See domestic servants
settlement, natural or acquired, 220
settling disputes between nations. See
disputes between nations, settling
Sextus Aurelius Victor, 379n, 808
Sextus Pompey (Magnus Pius), 668


860
index
Seymour, Edward, duke of Somerset,
546n
Sforza, Francis, duke of Milan,
725
Sharaf Ad-Din ÛAli Yazdi, 97–98n,
808
shipwrecks, right to, 256
shores of seas, 255
sick persons: as enemies, 549; invalid
soldiers, asylums for, 476
Sigismund (Holy Roman Emperor),
283, 327, 727
Sigismund Augustus (king of Poland),
144, 689
silence, loss of rights by, 210
Simler, Josias, 212n, 549n, 808
single combat or dueling, 194–97
Sixtus V (pope), 170
slaves: postliminium and, 606; pris-
oners of war as, 556–57
small states, defense of sovereignty
of, xix
Smith, Adam, 137n
social mobility and luxury, 793–94
society: end or purpose of, 86; foun-
dations of natural law and, 749;
between nations, 72–73, 261–62;
perfection as aim of, 73; perfection
via natural law/political laws, 773–
81; between persons, 71–72, 261–
62; persons made for, 754
Socrates, 763, 765, 781, 787–88, 809
Sofy/Soﬁ, Joseph (king of Carazem),
565n, 719n
Soissons, congress of, 453
soldiers, 472–82
Solignac, Pierre-Joseph de La Pimpie,
388n, 803
Solı´s y Rivadeneira, Antonio de,
700n, 809
Somerset, Edward Seymour, duke of,
546n
Sourdis, archbishop of Bourdeaux,
474–75n
sovereigns and sovereignty, 96–112,
783–96; abandonment of, 212; am-
bassadors, authority to send, 683;
arbitration between subjects and,
109; assassination of, 103, 156, 170,
178–79, 716–19; civil revolts against
(see civil war); clergy, authority
over, 164–70; conquest, ownership
of, 602–3; debts of sovereign and
state, 384–85; deposed sovereigns,
treaties made by, 363–65; deriva-
tion and extent of authority of,
100; dismemberment of state, 241–
42; domain and, 303; donations of,
385–86; elective, 113; excommuni-
cation, Catholic practice of, 181–
82; executive power belonging to,
187, 192–93; in foreign countries,
725–27; glory of nation as duty of,
203–4; inalienability, 115–16, 123–
25; indivisibility of sovereignty,
117–18; interference in conduct of
another sovereign, no right to,
290; justice, duties with regard to,
186–89; killing of sovereign, 103,
156, 170, 178–79, 565–66, 716–19;
laws of nation and, 101–9; levying
troops, right of, 473–74; limita-
tions on obligations and rights be-
tween nations, 271; love of subjects
by, 153; luxury, civic dangers of,
150–51, 788–96; national obliga-
tions and rights invested in, 99;
obedience owed by subjects to,
109; obligations and rights, 96–112;
pardoning power, 193; patrimonial,
123–26; peace, obligation to culti-
vate, 652–53; peace treaties, author-
ity to make, 655–57, 659–60;
person, inviolability of, 103; pre-
rogatives of, 100; private contracts
made by sovereign, 382–86; private
property and, 236–37; public min-
isters, authority over, 112; public


index
861
property, alienation of, 238–39;
public property, authority over,
229–30; public property, preserva-
tion and repair of, 236; purpose
of, 96–99; regents, 117; religion,
rights and duties regarding, 159–
70, 787; renunciation of alle-
giance to, 210–12; renunciation of
sovereignty by, 115–16; representa-
tive character of, 99; reprisals, au-
thority to order, 462; resistance,
right of, 101n, 103–12, 288–89;
sponsio and, 379–82, 481–82; suc-
cessive or hereditary, 113–22; tax-
ing powers, 230–32; titles, honors,
rank, and precedence, 281–88;
treaties concluded by sovereigns,
338–39, 356–57, 372, 382–86;
truces, authority to conclude,
619–21; tyrants, right to over-
throw, 101n, 103–12; unequal trea-
ties and alliances impinging on,
351–52; universal monarchy in
Europe, Vattel’s fear of, 491–99;
violations of treaties by, 390–91;
war, right of making, 470–71
sovereignty of states, 83–85
Spain: Aix-la-Chapelle, treaty of,
400, 503, 568; America attacked by,
275; commerce of, 275, 280; con-
traband goods, 530n, 531n, 532; di-
vision of New World between
Spain and Portugal by papacy, 215;
Dutch revolt, 104, 107n, 209n, 533,
544n, 553n, 585n, 618n, 642–43,
703; Incan empire, interference in,
290; Portuguese conquest and re-
versal, 609, 703; ravaging of North
African pirate hideouts by, 570;
sovereigns deposed in, 106n; sover-
eign succession in, 120, 121; War of
the Spanish Succession, 365, 493–
94, 525
Sparta and Spartans: arts and sci-
ences, national encouragement of,
147; assassination of enemies, 559;
disposition toward enemies, 564n;
education of youth in, 146; gov-
ernment of, 82n; killing of ene-
mies by, 545n; Rousseau’s followers
and, xiii; treaties of, 417
spies, use of, 581–82
sponsio, 379–82, 481–82
springs, poisoned, 563
Spurius Postumius, 374, 376, 378
St. See entries at Saint
standing armies, 476, 500
state assemblies, deputies sent to,
727–29
states. See nations
Steno (Sten Sture the Younger), 172,
401
Stettler, Michael, 212n, 327n, 455n,
809
straits, 255–56
stratagems and artiﬁces in war, 579–81
strict or restrictive interpretation of
treaties, 427–29
Stuart, James (the Young Pretender),
364–65, 689–90
Stumpf, Johannes, 212n, 809
subjects. See citizens and subjects
submission of nation to foreign
power, voluntary. See voluntary
submission to foreign power
subordinate powers: military ofﬁcers
as, 480–82, 615; treaties made with-
out proper permission by (sponsio),
379–82, 481–82; treaties made with
proper permission by, 372–73;
truces, authority to conclude, 620–
21
subsidies for war, allies providing, 513
subterfuges in treaties, 393, 408–9
successive or hereditary sovereignties,
113–22
“sufﬁcient reason for an act of the
will,” 424–25


862
index
Sully, Maximilien de Be´thune, duc
de, xi, 161, 238, 504n, 631, 710, 743,
789, 809
sumptuary laws, 793–96
superstition, 148–49
supplicants, 225
supreme courts, 188–89
surprise attacks, 579–81
surrender or capitulation of towns
and cities, 629–32
suspension of hostilities, 618–19. See
also truces
Sweden: arbitration between subjects
and sovereigns in, 109; Charles,
duke of Sudermania, usurpation
by, 689; contraband goods, 529;
Great Northern War, 288n, 486,
571; papacy, power of, 172; peace,
right to make, 656; Schwedt, treaty
of, 596–97; unequal alliance with
France, 350; war, right to make,
471
Switzerland: abandonment by sover-
eign, 212; alliances of, 519, 521; as-
sistance provided between states
of, 263–64; Catholic church, im-
portunities of, 173, 178n, 184; dis-
pute settlement by, 455; embassies
to France, 695–96; embassy, cities
with right of, 684; foreign levying
of troops in, 519, 521, 527; glory of
nation, as exemplar of, 205–6; he-
roic patriotism in, 154–55; Letters
Rogatory, 300; mercenary soldiers
from, 477, 478n; migration laws,
224; military discipline in, 480;
military prowess of, 201; militia of,
500; neutrality of, 527, 534, 538;
passage of troops through, refusal
of, 538; religion, different establish-
ments of, 158; religion, sovereign’s
authority in matters of, 169; rob-
bers, treatment of enemies waging
unlawful war as, 508; sponsio of La
Trimouille with, 381–82, 403; trea-
ties, power of cities to make, 339;
treaty keeping of, 343; unequal alli-
ance with France, 350; unjustly
conquered people, freeing of, 603;
valor, national reputation for, 200;
Vattel’s Swiss heritage, importance
of, xii–xiii, xix; Vaud, possession
of, 399–400; voluntary submission
of Lucerne to Austria, 209;
women as enemies, military treat-
ment of, 549. See also Neufchaˆtel
tacit agreements: maritime rights, re-
garding, 252; treaties, faith of, 394–
95
Tacitus (Publius Cornelius Tacitus),
108, 161n, 306n, 394, 427n, 487,
809
Tamerlane (Timur-Bec), 97–98n,
413–14, 487, 560n, 565n, 719n
Tarquin (Roman king), 715, 742
Tartars, 487, 697–98n
Taurians, 314n
taxes and taxation, 230; ambassado-
rial exemption from imposts, 723–
24; contributions from enemies,
569, 668; imposition of, 230–31;
migration tax, 221n; national
wealth and, 202; sovereigns and,
230–32; toll roads, 139–41
Tellier, Franc¸ois-Michel Le, marquis
de Louvois, 494
Tenchtheri, 329n
terminating disputes between na-
tions. See disputes between na-
tions, settling
territory of nation. See domain
terror, right of warring enemies to
use, 614
Tertullian (Florens Quintus Septimius
Tertullianus), 199n, 809
Teutoburg Forest, battle of, 561n
Thebes, 511, 607


index
863
Theodosian Code, 169n, 175n
Theodosius I (Roman emperor),
176
Thessalians, 511, 607
Thomasius, Christian, 176n
Thou, Jacques Auguste de, 389n,
546n, 595, 809–10
Thouars, Louis I de La Trimouille
(La Tre´moille), viscount of, 381–82,
403
Thucydides, 420, 810
Tiberius (Roman emperor), 426–27,
561
Timothy 1:9, 771
Timur-Bec (Tamerlane), 97–98n,
413–14, 487, 560n, 565n, 719n
titles of nations or sovereigns, 281–88
Titus (Roman emperor), 431, 551–52,
559–60
Titus Livius. See Livy
Titus Veturius Calvinus, 374
toleration of religion, 162
tolls and toll roads, 139–41, 328
Tottila (king of the Goths), 571–72
Toulouse, Raymond, count of, 182–
83n
Tournay, siege of, 625
towns and cities: bombardment of,
570, 572–73; capitulation of, 629–
32; conquest of, 596–98, 606–8;
embassy, right of, 684–85; gover-
nors defending enemy towns, kill-
ing of, 546–49; noncombatants,
treatment of, 550–51; postliminium,
right of, 606–8
trade. See commerce
trading companies, 138, 232–33. See
also East Indies companies
traite foraine, 318
traitors, 584–85, 627–28, 707–10
Trajan (Roman emperor), 125
treason, 584–85, 627–28, 707–10
treaties and conventions, 77, 338–65;
alienation of public property by,
239–40; asseverations used in, 392;
authority to make, 338–39, 372–73;
auxiliary, 512; boundaries and terri-
tories settled by, 77; commercial,
136–37, 275–78, 360; conﬂicts be-
tween, 443–47; deposed sovereigns,
made by, 363–65; dissolution due
to destruction of contracting
power, 369–70; dissolution due to
mutual consent, 371–72; dissolu-
tion due to violation of terms,
367–69; duties owed to self, con-
ﬂicting with, 345–46; between ene-
mies, 576–77; equal treaties, 346–
48; existing treaties, agreements
contrary to, 343–44; expiration of,
366; faith or sacredness of, 386–95,
411; interpretation of (see interpre-
tation of treaties); lawful vs. un-
lawful, necessary law of nations as
means of distinguishing, 70–71;
maritime rights, 251; on migration
rights, 224; with multiple nations
toward same end, 344; nations
bound by, 83; nations under pro-
tection of foreign power (see under
voluntary submission to foreign
power); natural law, things already
due by, 345–46; of neutrality, 525–
26; nulliﬁcation, grounds for, 341–
42, 419–20, 435, 440; oaths, use of,
390–92; obligation to observe
terms of, 342–43; of peace (see
peace treaties); perfect treaties,
360; personal treaties and alliances,
355, 362–64; as positive law, 78; on
postliminium, 611; precedence of
more ancient allies regarding, 344;
prescription, 338; private contracts
made by sovereign, 382–86; by
proxies or plenipotentiaries, 339–
40; real treaties, 355–59, 364–65; re-
ligion, difference of, 342, 392;
renewal of, 366–67; securities (see


864
index
treaties and conventions (continued )
security given for observance of
treaties); sovereigns, treaties made
by, 338–39, 356–57, 372, 382–86;
sponsio (treaties made by subordi-
nate powers without proper per-
mission), 379–82, 481–82;
subordinate powers with proper
permission, treaties made by, 372–
73; successors bound by, 359–62;
suspension of hostilities, 618–19
(see also truces); temporary vs. per-
petual or long-term, 338; truces (see
truces); types of, 345, 355; unequal
treaties, 349–55; unjust war, no as-
sistance owed in, 344; usucaption,
338; validity of, 340–41, 392; viola-
tion of terms, consequences of,
367–69; violation of terms, as vio-
lation of law of nations, 387–91;
war, treaties relative to, 512; word-
ing of, 393
Trente, treaty of, 341
Tribbechov, Adam, 176n, 810
tributary states, 83
Trimouille (Tre´moille), Louis II de
La, viscount of Thouars, 382–83,
403
Trollius, archbishop of Upsal, 172
troops. See entries at military
truces, 618–33; authority to conclude,
619–21; civil revolts during, 627;
contravention or violation of, 622–
23; dead, burial of, 626; expiration,
renewal of war at end of, 629; gen-
eral effects of, 624–25; intercourse
and travel between enemy coun-
tries during, 628; military actions
during, 624–28; partial and gen-
eral, 619; particular conditions of,
628–29; penalties for violation of,
622–23; postliminium, 628; publi-
cation of, 621–22; suspension of
hostilities vs., 618–19; time of, 619,
623–24; treasonous offers during,
627–28; war not terminated by, 619
trumpeters, ambassadorial, 702–5
Tschudi, Aegidius (Giles), 155n, 206n,
212n, 327n, 402n, 455n, 810
Tucker, Dean, 137n
Turenne, Henri de la Tour d’Auvergne,
Vicomte de, 205, 415, 419
Turkish empire: ambassadors, respect
for, 721; capitulation, 631; general
truce with, 619; limitations on ob-
ligations and rights between na-
tions and, 270; Malta, siege of,
547; Vienna, siege of, 263; war
made without reason or motive by,
487
Turretini (Turretin or Turretinus),
Franc¸ois, 171n, 182n, 810
Twelve Tables, 780, 781n
tyrants, right to overthrow, 101n,
103–9
Uladislaus or Ladislaus (king of
Naples), 255
Uladislaus or Vladislaus III (king of
Poland), 388
Ulpian (Domitius Ulpianus), 356
Ulysses, 523
Unam sanctam, 171
uncultivated land, domain over,
306–7
unequal treaties and alliances, 83,
349–55, 683–85
United Provinces. See Netherlands
universality of natural law, 775
universal monarchy in Europe,
Vattel’s fear of, 491–99
unjust war: alliances denied in, 515;
both sides, war not just on, 489–
90; defensive, 487–88; deﬁned,
484; liberty of unjustly conquered
people, restoring, 603; passage of
troops denied in cases of, 541; post-
liminium, 604; treaties of assis-


index
865
tance not required to be honored
regarding, 344; voluntary law of
nations on, 592–93
unlawful and informal wars, 507–8
unlawful means used to obtain good
ends, 202
Urban VI (pope), 177n
Urban VIII (pope), 177, 280
urban environments. See towns and
cities
Usbecks, 301
Usipetes, 329n
usucaption, 331–38
usurpers: embassy with, 688–90;
peace treaties with, 660–61
Utrecht, treaty of, 308, 662
vagrants, 220
Valens (Flavius Julius Valens, Roman
emperor), 328
Valerian (Roman emperor), 394–95
Valerius Maximus, 82n, 394n, 558n,
583–84, 810
Valette, Cardinal De la, 474–75n
valor, national reputation for, 200–
201
van Beuningen, Coenraad, 296n,
665n
van Bynkershoek, Cornelius, 463n,
717n, 730n, 732n, 736, 799
Vandals, 329
Varro (Marcus Terrentius Varro), 7n,
810–11
Varus (Publius Quinctilius Varus), 561
Vassor, Michel Le, 291n, 804
Vattel, David, ix
Vattel, Emer de: biographical infor-
mation, xi–xii; De´fense of Leibniz’s
philosophy, x; dialogues, xi (see also
Dialogue Between the Prince of ****
and His Conﬁdant); essays and es-
say collections, x–xii (see also Can
Natural Law Bring Society to Per-
fection Without the Assistance of Po-
litical Laws? and Essay on the
Foundation of Natural Law); illus-
tration, iii; Law of Nations (see
Law of Nations); Loisir Philoso-
phique, 186n; Swiss heritage, inﬂu-
ence of, xii–xiii, xix, 20
Vaud, Swiss possession of, 399–400
Vega, Garcilaso (Garcillaso) de la,
290n, 802
Veii, 629
Velly, Paul Franc¸ois, 97n, 125n, 183n,
341n, 728n, 811
Venice: commerce of, 280; embassy,
716; maritime laws of, 254–55; pa-
pacy, power of, 172; ranking and
precedence of nations, effect of
form of government on, 282; War
of the Austrian Succession and,
534
Vera, Antony de, 707n
Vertot, Rene´-Aubert de, 172n, 179n,
401n, 811
Vervins, peace of, 532
Vespasian (Roman emperor), 431n
vice and virtue: moral science or
ethics, deﬁned, 747–48; national
love of virtue and abhorrence of
vice, fostering, 150
Victor Amadeus II, duke of Savoy,
428–29, 525
Vienna, council of, ix, xviii–xix
Vienna, treaty of, 347
Vienna, Turkish siege of, 263
Villeroy, minister, 689
Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro),
397n, 449n, 455n, 553n, 581n, 618n,
811
Viriatus, 583
virtue and vice: moral science or
ethics, deﬁned, 747–48; national
love of virtue and abhorrence of
vice, fostering, 150
Vladislaus or Uladislaus III (king of
Poland), 388


866
index
Vogel, Franz Adam, 173n, 206n, 811
Volcatius Gallicanus, 616n
voluntary law of nations, 16–17, 75–
76; on dispute resolution, 456–57;
enemy property, treatment of,
574–75; necessary law distin-
guished from, 78–79; as positive
law, 78; on property acquired by
war, 594; usucaption and prescrip-
tion, 337; on war, 589–93
voluntary submission to foreign
power, 83–85, 207–10; authority to
make treaties, 339; effect on exist-
ing treaties, 370–71; embassy, right
of, 683–85; unequal treaties, 349–55
volunteer soldiers, 615
von Wattenwyl, Alexander Ludwig.
See Wattenwyl (De Watteville),
Alexander Ludwig von
Vopiscus (Flavius Vopiscus), 320n
Waldemar I (king of Denmark),
474n
war, 469–71; aggrandizement of
neighboring power, 491–99; allies,
between, 517; capitulation of
towns and cities, 629–32; civil (see
civil war); commencement of hos-
tilities, 504–5; commerce between
neutral states and states at war,
528–34; compelling assistance from
another nation, 266; conquest,
308, 568, 593, 596–603, 606–9;
declarations of, 500–506, 522–23;
defensive, 471, 487–88, 503, 515;
deﬁned, 469; disputes leading to
right to wage, 455–57; doubtful
causes, 489; embassy in, 686–88;
equitable conditions of peace of-
fered after declarations of, 502;
faith between enemies in, 575–85;
foreigners, treatment of, 505, 506n;
government of another nation, no
right to interfere in, 289–93; gov-
ernment’s duty to protect nation
against, 198–203; horrors of, 653–
54; informal and unlawful wars,
507–8; instruments of (armies,
troops, and commanders), 472–82,
500, 513; just (see just war); lawful
wars in due form, 507–8; mischie-
vous nations and sovereigns, coali-
tions against, 289; motives for, 483,
484–87; natural law of nations on,
589–90; necessary law of nations
on, 589; necessity, right of, 320–21;
obligations and rights in (see obli-
gations and rights in just wars); of-
fensive, 471, 488–89, 503; passage
of troops through neutral country
leading to acts of, 534–41; perfec-
tion, no entitlement of one nation
to forcibly obtrude upon an-
other for purposes of, 265; post-
liminium, 603–11, 628; preparation
for war, responding to, 499–500;
pretexts for, 486–87; prisoners of
(see prisoners of war); property ac-
quired by, 568–69, 593–603; public
vs. private, 469; punishment, right
of, 289; reparations, right to, 289;
reprisals leading to, 466–67; resis-
tance, right of, 288–89; right of
making, 469–71; safe-conducts
during, 633–37; stratagems and ar-
tiﬁces in, 579–81; terror, right to
use, 614; treaties, violation of, 287–
88; treaties relative to, 512; unjust
(see unjust war); voluntary law of
nations on, 589–93. See also alli-
ances; enemies; neutrality and neu-
tral states; peace; peace treaties;
truces
warlike associations vs. alliances, 512
War of the Austrian Succession, 425,
481n, 521n, 534n, 554, 573n, 614,
616
War of the Polish Succession, 666


index
867
War of the Spanish Succession, 365,
493–94, 525
wastage of enemy property, 570–73
Wattenwyl (De Watteville), Alexander
Ludwig von: biographical informa-
tion, 811; on embassy, 684n; on
glory of nation, 206n; on post-
liminium, 603n; on settling dis-
putes between nations, 455n, 463n;
on treaties, 381n, 383n; on volun-
tary submission of nation to for-
eign power, 209n, 212n; on war,
564n
wealth of nations, 201–2, 228–29,
788–96
weapons, poisoned, 562–63
Westphalia, peace of, 286n, 389, 684,
701, 726n
Whitehall, treaty of, 529
Wicquefort, Abraham de: on consuls,
280; on honors due ambassadors,
695n; on immunity of ambassa-
dors, 707n, 712n, 714n, 741n, 742;
passage, ambassadorial right of,
701n, 702n, 703n; on right of em-
bassy, 687n
William I (the Silent) of Orange,
560
William III of Orange (king of
England), 290, 365, 373, 573, 580,
689–90
William VIII (pope), 177n
wills: of foreigners, 315–17; of prison-
ers of war, 611
wine trade, 137n, 139
Winkelried, Arnold de, 154–55
Witt, Johan de, 296n, 461n, 530n,
532n, 665n, 811–12
Wolff (Wolf), Christian: on allies and
associates, 518n; biographical infor-
mation, 812; on embassy, 705n; on
hostages, 401n; on inalienable
rights, 321n; on natural law, 10–16,
748n, 751n, 752n, 757n; on peace
treaties, 659n, 678n; on prescrip-
tion, 331; on treaties, 368n, 408n;
Vattel inﬂuenced by, xi, xii, xiv–xv,
10–16; on voluntary law of na-
tions, 76
Wolsius, Johannes, 333
women: ambassadors, wives of, 741;
as enemies, 510, 549; as prisoners of
war, 551; right to carry off, 321–22;
safe-conducts for individuals not
covering wives, 635; as soldiers, 474
wrecks, right to, 256
Xenophon, 146n, 545n, 550n, 564n,
583n, 812
Young Pretender (James Stuart), 364–
65, 689–90
Zenobia (queen of Armenia), 394


This book is set in Adobe Garamond, a modern adaptation by
Robert Slimbach of the typeface originally cut around 1540 by the
French typographer and printer Claude Garamond. The Garamond
face, with its small lowercase height and restrained contrast between
thick and thin strokes, is a classic “old-style” face and has long been
one of the most inﬂuential and widely used typefaces.
Printed on paper that is acid-free and meets the requirements of
the American National Standard for Permanence of Paper for
Printed Library Materials, z39.48-1992. A
Book design by Louise OFarrell
Gainesville, Florida
Typography by Apex CoVantage
Madison, Wisconsin
Printed and bound by Worzalla Publishing Company
Stevens Point, Wisconsin

book i: nations in themselves
terest of the prince, as well as his duty, to maintain and respect the laws.
He ought to submit to them himself. We ﬁnd this truth established in
a piece published by order of Lewis XIV.11 one of the most absolute
princes that ever reigned in Europe. “Let it not be said that the sovereign
is not subject to the laws of his state, since the contrary proposition is
one of the truths of the law of nations, which ﬂattery has sometimes
attacked, and which good princes have always defended, as a tutelar di-
vinity of their states.”*
But it is necessary to explain this submission of the prince to thelaws.
First he ought, as we have just seen, to follow their regulations in all the
acts of his administration. In the second place, he is himself subject, in
his private affairs, to all the laws that relate to property. I say, “in his
private affairs”; for when he acts as a sovereign prince, and in the name
of the state, he is subject only to the fundamental laws, and the law of
nations. In the third place, the prince is subject to certain regulations of
general polity, considered by the state as inviolable, unlesshebeexcepted
in express terms by the law, or tacitly by a necessary consequence of his
dignity. I here speak of the laws that relate tothesituationof individuals,
and particularly of those that regulate the validity of marriages. These
laws are established to ascertainthestateof families:nowtheroyalfamily
is that of all others the most important to be certainly known. But,
fourthly, we shall observe in general, with respect to this question, that,
if the prince is invested with a full, absolute, and unlimited sovereignty,
he is above the laws, which derive from him all their force; and he may
dispense with his own observance of them, whenever natural justiceand
equity will permit him. <17> Fifthly, as to the laws relative to morals
and good order, the prince ought doubtless to respect them, and to sup-
port them by his example. But, sixthly, he is certainly aboveallcivilpenal
laws. The majesty of a sovereign will not admit of his being punished
like a private person; and his functions are too exalted to allow of his
* [[Antoine Bilaine,]] A treatise on the right of the queen to several states of the
Spanish monarchy, 1667, in 12mo, part II. p. 191.
11. Louis XIV of France, “the Sun King,” r. 1643–1715.
§49. In what
sense he is
subject to
the laws.


chapter iv
103
being molested under pretence of a fault that does not directly concern
the government of the state.
It is not sufﬁcient that the prince be above the penal laws: even the
interest of nations requires that we should go something farther. The
sovereign is the soul of the society; if he be not held in veneration by
the people, and in perfect security, the public peace, and the happiness
and safety of the state, are in continual danger. The safety of the nation
then necessarily requires that the person of the prince be sacred and in-
violable. The Roman people bestowed this privilege on their tribunes,
in order that they might meet with no obstruction in defending them,
and that no apprehension might disturb them in the discharge of their
ofﬁce. The cares, the employments of a sovereign, are of much greater
importance than those of the tribunes were, and not less dangerous, if
he be not provided with a powerful defence. It is impossible even for the
most just and wise monarch, not to make mal-contents; and ought the
state to continue exposed to the danger of losing so valuable a prince by
the hand of an assassin? The monstrous and absurd doctrine, that a pri-
vate person is permitted to kill a bad prince, deprived the French, in the
beginning of the last century, of a hero who was truly the father of his
people.* Whatever a prince may be, it is an enormous crime against a
nation to deprive them of a sovereign whom they think proper to obey.†
* Since the above was written, France has witnessed a renewal of those horrors.
She sighs at the idea of having given birth to a monster capable of violating the
majesty of kings in the person of a prince, whom the qualities of his heart entitle to
the love of his subjects and the veneration of foreigners. [The author alludes to the
attempt made by Damien to assassinate Louis XV.]
† In Mariana’s work above quoted [[De rege et regis institutione]], I ﬁnd (chap.vii.
towards the end) a remarkable instance of the errors into which we are apt to be led
by a subtle sophistry destitute of sound principles.—That author allows us to poison
a tyrant, and even a public enemy, provided it be done without obliging him, either
by force or through mistake or ignorance, to concur in the act that causes his own
death,—which would be the case, for instance, in presenting himapoisoneddraught.
For (says he), in thus leading him to an act of suicide, although committed through
ignorance, we make him violate the natural law which forbids each individual to take
away his own life; and the crime of him who thus unknowingly poisons himself
redounds on the realauthor,—thepersonwhoadministeredthepoison.—Necogatur
§50. His
person is
sacred and
inviolable.


104
book i: nations in themselves
But this high attribute of sovereignty is no reason why the nation
should not curb an insupportable tyrant, pronounce sentence on him
(still respecting in his person the majesty of his rank), and withdraw
itself from his obedience. To this indisputable right a <18> powerful
republic owes its birth. The tyranny exercised by Philip II. in the Neth-
erlands excited those provinces to rise: seven of them, closely confed-
erated, bravely maintained their liberties, under the conduct of the he-
roes of the house of Orange; and Spain, after several vain and ruinous
efforts, acknowledged them sovereign and independent states. If theau-
thority of the prince is limited and regulated by the fundamental laws,
the prince, on exceeding thebounds prescribedhim,commandswithout
any right, and even without a just title: the nation is not obliged to obey
him, but may resist his unjust attempts. As soon as a prince attacks the
constitution of the state, he breaks the contract which bound the people
to him: the people become free by the act of the sovereign, and can no
longer view him but as an usurper who would load them with oppres-
sion. This truth is acknowledged by every sensible writer, whose pen is
not enslaved by fear, or sold for hire. But some celebrated authors main-
tain, that if the prince is invested with the supreme command in a full
and absolute manner, nobody has a right to resist him, much less to curb
him, and that nought remains for the nation but to suffer and obey with
patience. This is founded upon the supposition that such a sovereign is
not accountable to any person for the manner in which he governs, and
that if the nation might controul his actions and resist him, where it
thinks them unjust, his authority would no longer be absolute; which
would be contrary to this hypothesis. Theysaythatanabsolutesovereign
completely possesses all the political authority of the society, which no-
tantum sciens aut imprudens sibi conscire mortem; quod esse nefas judicamus, ve-
neno in potu aut cibo, quod hauriat qui perimendus est, aut simili alia retemperato.
[[“Let him not be forced knowingly or imprudently to be complicit in his own death;
we judge it to be unlawful that he who must perish should swallow poison in food
or drink or mixed with some other substance” (trans. Eds.).]] A ﬁne reason, truly!
Was Mariana disposed to insult the understandings of his readers, or only desirous
of throwing a slight varnish over the detestable doctrine contained in that chapter?
[[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§51. But the
nation may
curb a tyrant,
and withdraw
itself from his
obedience.


chapter iv
105
body can oppose,—that, if he abuses it, he does ill indeed, and wounds
his conscience,—but that his commands are not the less obligatory, as
being founded on a lawful right to command,— that the nation, by
giving him absolute authority, has reserved no share of it to itself, and
has submitted to his discretion, &c. We might be content with answer-
ing, that in this light there is not any sovereign who is completely and
fully absolute. But in order to remove all these vain subtleties, let us
remember the essential end of civil society. Is it not to labour in concert
for the common happiness of all? Was it not with this view that every
citizen divested himself of his rights, and resigned his liberty? Couldthe
society make such use of its authority, as irrevocably to surrender itself
and all its members to the discretion of a cruel tyrant? No, certainly,
since it would no longer possess any right itself, if it were disposed to
oppress a part of the citizens. When therefore it confers the supremeand
absolute government, without an express reserve, it is necessarily with
the tacit reserve that the sovereign shall use it for the safety of thepeople,
and not for their ruin. If he becomes the scourgeof thestate,hedegrades
himself; he is no better than a public enemy, against whom the nation
may and ought to defend itself; and if he has carried his tyranny to the
utmost height, why should even the life of so cruel and perﬁdious an
enemy be spared? Who shall presume to blame the conduct of the Ro-
man senate, that declared Nero an enemy to his country? <19>
But it is of the utmost importance to observe, that this judgment can
only be passed by the nation, or by a body which represents it, and that
the nation itself can not make any attempt on the person of the sov-
ereign, except in cases of extreme necessity, and when the prince, by
violating the laws, and threatening the safety of his people, puts himself
in a state of war against them. It is the person of the sovereign, not that
of an unnatural tyrant and a public enemy, thattheinterestof thenation
declares sacred and inviolable. We seldom see such monsters as Nero. In
the more common cases, when a prince violatesthefundamentallaws,—
when he attacks the liberties and privileges of his subjects,—or (if he be
absolute) when his government, without being carried to extreme vio-
lence, manifestly tends to the ruin of the nation,—it may resist him,
pass sentence on him, and withdraw from his obedience: butthoughthis


106
book i: nations in themselves
may be done, still his person should be spared, and that for the welfare
of the state.* It is above <20> a century since the English took up arms
* Dissimulandum censeo quatenus salus publica patiatur, privatimque corruptis
moribus princeps contingat: alioquin si rempublicam in periculum vocat, si patriae
religionis contemptor existit, neque medicinam ullam recipit, abdicandum judico,
alium substituendum; quod in Hispania non semel fuisse factum scimus: quasi fera
irritata, omnium telis peti debet, cum, humanitate abdicata, tyrannum induit. Sic
Petro rege ob immanitatem dejecto publice, Henricus ejus frater, quamvis ex impari
matre, regnum obtinuit. Sic Henrico hujus abnepote ob ignaviam pravosque mores
abdicato procerum suffragiis, primumAlfonsusejusfrater,recteansecusnondisputo,
sed tamen in tenera aetate rex est proclamatus: deinde defuncto Alfonso, Elisabetha
ejus soror, Henrico invito, rerum summam ad se traxit, regio tantum nomine absti-
nens dum ille vixit. [[“My assessment is that there must be secrecy about the extent
of what public safety can tolerate, and the extent to which the prince can be privately
involved with corrupted morals; otherwise if he brings the state into danger, if he
stands forth as one who despises the religion of his country, and accepts no remedy,
then I judge he must abdicate and another take his place. We know this hashappened
more than once in Spain when, as a provoked wild animal needs to be pursued by
the weapons of all,humandecencyhasbeeninabeyanceandshehastakenonatyrant.
Thus, when Peter was king, when the people were laid low on account of hisexcesses,
his brother Henry, although from a different mother, obtained the kingdom. Thus
when by the votes of the nobles Henry had been deposed by his grandson onaccount
of his sloth and vicious morals, in the ﬁrst instance his brother Alfonsus was pro-
claimed king, I will not argue whether rightly or wrongly but at any rate at a tender
age. Then on the death of Alfonsus his sister Elisabeth assumed control of affairs
despite Henry’s unwillingness and was queen in all but name as long as he lived”
(trans. Eds.).]] Mariana, de Rege et Regis Institut. Lib. I. c. iii.
To this authority furnished by Spain, join that of Scotland, proved by the letter
of the barons to the pope, dated April 6, 1320 [[the Declaration of Arbroath, or
formal conﬁrmation of Scotland’s independence]], requesting him to prevail on the
king of England to desist from his enterprises against Scotland. After having spoken
of the evils they had suffered from him, they add—A quibus malis innumeris, ipso
juvante qui post vulnera medetur et sanat, liberatisumusperserenissimumprincipem
regem et dominum nostrum, dominum Robertum, qui pro populoet haereditatesuis
de manibus inimicorum liberandis, quasi alter Maccabaeus aut Josue, labores et tae-
dia, inedias et pericula, laeto sustinuit animo. Quem etiam divina dispositio,et(juxta
leges et consuetudines nostras, quas usque ad mortem sustinere volumus) juris suc-
cessio, et debitus nostrorum consensus et assensus nostrum fecerunt principematque
regem: cui, tanquam illi per quem salus in populo facta est, pro nostra libertate
tuenda, tam jure quam meritis tenemur, et volumus in omnibus adhaerere. Quem,
si ab inceptis desistet, regi Anglorum aut Anglis nos aut regnum nostrum volens sub-
jicere, tanquam inimicum nostrum et sui nostrique juris subversorem, statim ex-
pellere nitemur, et alium regem nostrum, qui ad defensionem nostram sufﬁciet, fa-


chapter iv
107
against their king, and obliged him to descend from the throne. A set
of able enterprising men, spurred on by ambition, took advantage of
the terrible ferment, caused by fanaticism and party spirit; and Great
Britain suffered her sovereign todie unworthilyonascaffold.Thenation
coming to itself discovered its former blindness. If, to this day, it still
annually makes a solemn atonement, it is not only, from the opinion
ciemus: quia, quamdiu centum viri remanserint, nunquam Anglorum dominio
aliquatenus volumus subjugari. Non enim propter gloriam,divitias,authonorespug-
namus, sed propter libertatem solummodo, quam nemo bonus nisi simul cum vita
amittit. [[“But from these countless evils we have been set free, by the help of Him
Who though He afﬂicts yet heals and restores, by our most tireless Prince, King and
Lord, the Lord Robert. He, that his people and his heritage might be delivered out
of the hands of our enemies, met toil and fatigue, hunger and peril, like another
Maccabaeus or Joshua, and bore them cheerfully. Him, too, divine providence, his
right of succession according to our laws and customs which we shall maintain to the
death, and the due consent and assent of us all have made our prince and king. To
him, as to the man by whom salvation has been wrought unto our people, we are
bound both by law and by his merits that our freedom may be still maintained, and
by him, come what may, we mean to stand. Yet if he should give up what he has
begun, and agree to make us or our kingdom subject to the king of England or the
English, we should exert ourselves at once to drive him out as our enemy and a sub-
verter of his own rights and ours, and make some other man who was well able to
defend us our king; for, as long as but a hundred of us remain alive, never will we on
any conditions be brought under English rule. It is in truth not for glory, nor riches,
nor honours that we are ﬁghting, but for freedom—for that alone, which no honest
man gives up but with life itself.” (Scottish nobles to Pope John XXII.)]]
“In the year 1581 (says Grotius, Ann. book III.) the confederated provinces of the
Netherlands,—after having for nine years continued to wage war against Philip the
Second [[king of Spain, r. 1556–98]] without ceasing to acknowledge him as their
sovereign,—at length solemnly deprived him of the authority he had possessed over
their country, because he had violated their laws and privileges.” The author after-
wards observes that “France, Spain herself, England, Sweden, Denmark, furnish in-
stances of kings deposed by their people, so that there are at present few sovereigns
inEurope whoseright tothecrownrestsonanyotherfoundationthantherightwhich
the people possess of divesting their sovereign of his power when he makes an ill use
of it.” Pursuant to this idea, the United Provinces, in their justiﬁcatory letters onthat
subject, addressed to the princes of the Empire and the king of Denmark,—after
having enumerated the oppressive acts of the king of Spain,—added—“Then, by a
mode whichhas been oftenenoughadoptedevenbythosenationsthatnowliveunder
kingly government, we wrested the sovereignty from him whose actions were all con-
trary to the duty of a prince.” Ibid. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]

108
book i: nations in themselves
that the unfortunate CharlesI. didnotdeservesocruelafate,but,doubt-
less, from a conviction that the very safetyof thestaterequirestheperson
of the sovereign to be held sacred and inviolable, and that the whole
nation ought to render this maxim venerable, by paying respect to it
when the care of its own preservation will permit.
One word more on the distinction that is endeavoured to be made
here in favour of an absolute sovereign. Whoever has well weighed the
force of the indisputable principles we have established, will be con-
vinced, that, when it is necessary to resist a prince who has become a
tyrant, the right of the people is still the same, whether that prince was
made absolute by the laws, or was not; because that right is derived from
what is the object of all political society,—thesafetyof thenation,which
is the supreme law.* But if the distinction of which we are treating, is
of no moment with respect to the right, it can be of none in practice,
with respect to expediency. As it is very difﬁcult to oppose an absolute
prince, and it cannot be done without raising great disturbances in the
state, and the most violent and dangerous commotions, it ought to be
attempted only in cases of extremity, when the public misery is raised
to such a height, that the people may say with Tacitus, miseram pacem
vel bello bene mutari, 12—that it is better to expose themselves to a civil
* Populi patroni non pauciora neque minora praesidia habent. Certe a republica
unde ortum habet regia postestas, rebus exigentibus, regens in jus vocari potest, et,
si sanitatem respuat, principatu spoliari; neque ita in principem jura potestatis
transtulit, ut non sibi majorem reservaˆrit potestatem. Ibid. cap. VI. [[“Thedefenders
of the people have means of defense which are not scantierorsmaller.Certainlywhen
circumstances demand it the ruler can be brought before the law by the state from
which royal power has its origin, and if he refuses to see sense he can be stripped of
his power; and no power has legally transferred to the prince, so he does not reserve
power to himself.” Annales et historiae de rebus Belgicis, lib. III (trans. Eds.).]]
Est tamen salutaris cogitatio, ut sit principibus persuasum, si rempublicam op-
presserint, si vitiis et foeditate intolerandi erunt, ea se conditione vivere, ut non jure
tantum, sed cum laude et gloria, perimi possint. Ibid. [[“It is however a salutary con-
sideration, that princes should be persuaded, if they oppress the state, if throughvice
and foulness they are unendurable, that they live under this condition that their re-
moval can be not just legal but praiseworthy and glorious” (trans. Eds.). Note added
in 1773/1797 editions.]]
12. “Even war is a good exchange for a miserable peace.” Tacitus, Annales, III.47.


chapter iv
109
war, than to endure them. But if the prince’s authority be limited,—if
it in some respects depends on a senate or a parliament that represents
the nation,—there are means of resisting and curbing him, without ex-
posing the state to violent shocks. When mild and innocent remedies
can be applied to the evil, there can be no reason for waiting until it
becomes extreme.
But however limited a prince’s authoritymaybe,heiscommonlyvery
jealous of it; it seldom happens that he patiently suffers resistance, and
peaceably submits to the judgment of his people. Can he want support,
while he is the distributer of <21> favours? We see too many base and
ambitious souls, for whom the state of a rich and decorated slave has
more charms than that of a modest and virtuous citizen. It is therefore
always difﬁcult for a nation to resist a prince and pronounce sentence
on his conduct, without exposing the state to dangerous troubles, and
to shocks capable of overturning it. This has sometimes occasioned a
compromise between the prince and the subjects, to submit to the de-
cision of a friendly power all the disputes that mightarisebetweenthem.
Thus the kings of Denmark, by solemn treaties, formerly referred to
those of Sweden the differences that might arise between them and their
senate: and this the kings of Sweden have also done with regard to those
of Denmark. The princes and statesof WestFriesland,andtheburgesses
of Embden, have in the same manner constituted the republic of the
United Provinces the judge of their differences. The princes and thecity
of Neufchatel established, in 1406, the canton of Berne perpetual judge
and arbitrator of their disputes. Thus also, according to the spirit of the
Helvetic confederacy, the entire body takes cognisance of the distur-
bances that arise in any of the confederated states, though each of them
is truly sovereign and independent.
As soon as a nation acknowledges a prince for its lawful sovereign, all
the citizens owe him a faithful obedience. He can neither govern the
state, nor perform what the nation expects from him, if he be not punc-
tually obeyed. Subjects then have no right, in doubtful cases, to examine
the wisdom or justice of their sovereign’s commands; this examination
belongs to the prince: his subjects ought to suppose (if there be a pos-
sibility of supposing it) that all his orders are just and salutary: he alone
is accountable for the evil that may result from them.
§52. Arbitra-
tion between
the king and
his subjects.
§53. The
obedience
which subjects
owe to a
sovereign.


110
book i: nations in themselves
Nevertheless this ought not to be entirely a blind obedience. No en-
gagement can oblige or even authorise a man to violate thelawof nature.
All authors who have any regard to conscience or decency, agree that no
one ought to obey such commands as are evidently contrary to that sa-
cred law. Those governors of places who bravely refused to execute the
barbarous orders of Charles IX.13 on the memorable day of St. Bar-
tholomew,14 have been universally praised; and the court did not dare
to punish them, at least openly. “Sire,” said the brave Orte, governor of
Bayonne, in his letter, “I have communicated your majesty’s command
to your faithful inhabitants and warriors in the garrison: and I have
found there only good citizens and brave soldiers; but not a single exe-
cutioner: wherefore both they and I most humbly entreat your majesty
to be pleased to employ our hands and our lives in things that are pos-
sible, however hazardous they may be; and we will exert ourselves to the
last drop of our blood in the execution of them.”* <22> The count de
Tende, Charny, andothers,repliedtothosewhobroughtthemtheorders
of the court, “that they had too great a respect for the king, to believe
that such barbarous orders came from him.”
It is more difﬁcult to determine in what cases a subject may not only
refuse to obey, but even resist a sovereign, and oppose his violence by
force. When a sovereign does injury to any one, he acts without any real
authority; but we ought not thence to conclude hastily that the subject
may resist him. The nature of sovereignty, and the welfare of the state,
will not permit citizens to oppose a prince whenever his commands ap-
pear to them unjust or prejudicial. This would be falling back into the
state of nature, and rendering government impossible. A subject ought
patiently to suffer from the prince, doubtful wrongs, and wrongs that
are supportable,—the former, because whoever has submitted to the de-
cision of a judge, is no longer capable of deciding his own pretensions;
and as to those that are supportable, they ought to be sacriﬁced to the
* Mezeray’s Hist. of France, vol. II. p. 1107.
13. Charles IX, king of France, r. 1560–74.
14. August 24, 1572, when approximately three thousand Protestants were mur-
dered at Paris.
§54. In what
cases they may
resist him.


chapter iv
111
peace and safety of thestate,onaccountof thegreatadvantagesobtained
by living in society. It is presumed, as matter of course, that every citizen
has tacitly engaged to observe this moderation; because, without it, so-
ciety could not exist. But when the injuriesaremanifestandatrocious,—
when a prince, without any apparent reason, attempts to deprive us of
life, or of those things, the loss of which would render life irksome,—
who can dispute our right to resist him? Self-preservation is not only a
natural right, but an obligation imposed by nature, and no man can
entirely and absolutely renounce it. And though he might give it up, can
he be considered as having done it by his political engagements, since
he entered into society only to establish his own safety upon a moresolid
basis? The welfare of society does not require such a sacriﬁce; and, as
Barbeyrac well observes in his notes on Grotius, “If the public interest
requires, that those who obey should suffer some inconvenience, it is no
less for the public interest that those who command, should be afraid
of driving their patience to the utmost extremity.”* The prince who vi-
olatesalllaws,—whonolongerobservesanymeasures,—andwhowould
in his transports of fury take away the life of an innocent person,—
divests himself of his character, and is no longer to be considered in any
other light than that of an unjust and outrageous enemy, against whom
his people are allowed to defend themselves. The personof thesovereign
is sacred and inviolable: but he who, after having lost all the sentiments
of a sovereign, divests himself even of the appearances and exteriorcon-
duct of a monarch, degrades himself: he no longer retains the sacred
character of a sovereign, and cannot retain the prerogatives attached to
that exalted rank. However, if this prince is not a monster,—if he is
furious only against us in particular, and <23> from the effects of a sud-
den transport or a violent passion, and is supportable to the rest of the
nation,—the respect we ought to pay to the tranquillity of the state is
such, and the respect due to sovereign majesty so powerful, that we are
strictly obliged to seek every other means of preservation, rather than to
put his person in danger. Every one knows the example set by David: he
ﬂed,—he kept himself concealed, to secure himself from Saul’s fury,—
* De Jure Belli & Pacis, Lib. 1. cap. iv. §11. not. 2.


112
book i: nations in themselves
and more than once spared the life of his persecutor.15 When the reason
of Charles VI.16 of France was suddenly disordered by a fatal accident,
he in his fury killed several of those who surrounded him: none of them
thought of securing his own life at the expense of that of the king; they
only endeavoured to disarm and secure him. They did their duty like
men of honour and faithful subjects, in exposing their lives, to save that
of this unfortunate monarch: such a sacriﬁce is due to the state and to
sovereignmajesty:furiousfromthederangementof hisfaculties,Charles
was not guilty; he might recover his health, and again become a good
king.
What has been said is sufﬁcient for the intention of this work: the
reader may see these questions treated more at large in many books that
are well known. We shall conclude this subject with an important ob-
servation. A sovereign is undoubtedly allowed to employ ministers to
ease him in the painful ofﬁces of government; but he ought never to
surrender his authority to them. When a nation chuses a conductor, it
is not with a view that he should deliver up his charge into other hands.
Ministers ought only to be instruments in the hands of the prince; he
ought constantly to direct them, and continually endeavour to know
whether they act according to his intentions. If the imbecillity of age,
or any inﬁrmity, render him incapable of governing, a regent ought to
be nominated, according to the laws of the state: but when once the
sovereign is capable of holding the reins, let him insist on being served,
but never suffer himself to be superseded. The last kings of France of
the ﬁrst race surrendered the government and authority to the mayors
of the palace: thus becoming mere phantoms, they justly lost the title
and honours of a dignity of which they had abandoned the functions.
The nation has every thing to gain in crowning an all-powerfulminister;
for he will improve that soil as his own inheritance, which he plundered
whilst he only reaped precarious advantages from it.
15. I Samuel 19–20.
16. Charles VI, “the Well-Beloved,” r. 1380–1422.
§55. Of
ministers.


chapter v
113
chapter v
Of States Elective, Successive or Hereditary,
and of those called Patrimonial.
We have seen in the preceding chapter, that it originally belongs to a
nation to confer the supreme authority, and to chuse the person by
whom it is to be governed. If it confers the sovereignty on him for his
own person only, reserving to itself <24> the right of chusingasuccessor
after the sovereign’s death, the state is elective. As soon as the prince is
elected according to the laws, he enters into the possession of all the
prerogatives which those laws annex to his dignity.
It has been debated, whether elective kings and princes are real sov-
ereigns. But he who lays any stress on this circumstance must have only
a very confused idea of sovereignty. The manner in which a prince ob-
tains his dignity has nothing to do with determining its nature. Wemust
consider, ﬁrst, whether the nation itself forms an independent society
(see chap. I.), and secondly, what is the extent of the power it has in-
trusted to the prince. Whenever the chief of an independent state really
represents his nation, he ought to be considered asa truesovereign(§40),
even though his authority should be limited in several respects.
When a nation would avoid the troubles which seldom fail to accom-
pany the election of a sovereign, it makes its choice for a long succession
of years, by establishing the right of succession, or by renderingthecrown
hereditary in a family, according to the order and rules that appear most
agreeable to that nation. The name of an Hereditary State or Kingdom
is given to that where the successor is appointed by the same law that
regulates the successions of individuals. The Successive Kingdom is that
where a person succeeds according to a particular fundamental law of
the state. Thus the lineal succession, and of males alone, is established
in France.
The right of succession is not always the primitive establishment of
a nation; it may have been introduced by the concession of another sov-
ereign, and even by usurpation. But when it is supported by long pos-
§56. Of elec-
tive states.
§57. Whether
elective kings
are real
sovereigns.
§58. Of
successive and
hereditary
states.
The origin of
the right of
succession.
§59. Other
origins of
this right.

114
book i: nations in themselves
session, the people are considered as consenting to it; and this tacit con-
sent renders it lawful, though the source be vicious. It rests then on the
foundation we have already pointed out,—a foundation that alone is
lawful and incapable of being shaken, and to which we must ever revert.
The same right, according to Grotius and the generality of writers,
may be derived from other sources, as conquest, or the right of a pro-
prietor, who, being master of a country, should invite inhabitants to
settle there, and give them lands, on condition of their acknowledging
him and his heirs for their sovereigns. But as it is absurd to suppose that
a society of men can place themselves in subjection otherwise than with
a view to their own safety and welfare, and still more that they can bind
their posterity on any other footing, it ultimately amounts to the same
thing; and it must still be said that the succession is established by the
express will or the tacit consent of the nation, for the welfare and safety
of the state.
It thus remains an undeniable truth, that in all cases the succession is
established or received only with a view to the public welfare and the
general safety. If it happened then that the order established in this re-
spect became destructive to the state, the nation would certainly have a
right tochangeitby anewlaw.<25>Saluspopulisupremalex,—thesafety
of the people is the supreme law; and this law is agreeable to the strictest
justice,—the people having united in society only with a view to their
safety and greater advantage.*
This pretended proprietory right attributed to princes is a chimera
produced by an abuse which its supporters would fain make of the laws
respecting private inheritances. The state neither is nor can be a patri-
mony, since the end of patrimony is the advantage of the possessor,
* Nimirum, quod publicae salutis causa et communi consensu statutum est,
eadem multitudinis voluntate, rebus exigentibus, immutari quid obstat? [[“To be
sure, when circumstances demand it, what stands in the way of changing that which
has been established for the sake of public safety and by common consent when this
too is the will of the multitude?” (trans. Eds.)]] Mariana, ibid. [[De rege]] c. iv.
[[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§60. Other
sources which
still amount
to the same
thing.
§61. A nation
may change
the order of
the succession.


chapter v
115
whereas the prince is established only for the advantage of the state.*
The consequence is evident: if the nation plainly perceives that the heir
of her prince would be a pernicious sovereign, she has a right to exclude
him.
The authors whom we oppose, grant this right to a despotic prince,
while they refuse it to nations. This is becausetheyconsidersuchaprince
as a real proprietor of the empire, and will not acknowledge that thecare
of their own safety, and the right to govern themselves, still essentially
belong to the society, although they have intrusted them, even without
any express reserve, to a monarch and his heirs. In their opinion, the
kingdom is the inheritance of the prince, in the same manner as his ﬁeld
and his ﬂocks,—a maxim injurious to human nature, and which they
would not have dared to advance in an enlightened age, if it had not the
support of an authority which too often proves stronger than reasonand
justice.
A nation may, for the same reason, oblige one branch who removes
to another country, to renounce all claim to the crown, as a daughter
who marries a foreign prince. These renunciations,requiredorapproved
by the state, are perfectly valid, since they are equivalent to a law that
* WhenPhilip II.resignedtheNetherlandstohisdaughterIsabellaClaraEugenia,
it was said (according to the testimony of Grotius) that it was setting a dangerous
precedent, for a prince to treat free citizens as his property, and barter them away like
domestic slaves;—that, among barbarians indeed, the extraordinary practice some-
timesobtained,of transferringgovernmentsbywillordonation,becausethosepeople
were incapable of discerning the difference between a prince and a master;—butthat
those whom superior knowledge enabled to distinguish between what is lawful and
what is not, could plainly perceive that the administration of a state is the property of
the people (thence usually denominated res-publica);—and that as, in every period
of the world, there have been nations whogovernedthemselvesbypopularassemblies
or by a senate, there have been others who intrusted the general management of their
concerns to princes. For it is not to be imagined (it was added) that legitimate sov-
ereignties have originated from any other source than the consent of the people, who
gave themselves all up to a single person, or (for the sake of avoiding the tumults and
discord of elections) to a whole family: and those to whom they thus committed
themselves, were induced by the prospect of honourable pre-eminence alone to ac-
cept a dignity by which they were bound to promote the general welfare of their
fellow citizens in preference to their own private advantage. Grotius. Hist. of the
Disturbances in the Netherlands. Book II. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§62. Of
renunciations.


116
book i: nations in themselves
such persons and their posterity should be excluded from the throne.
Thus the laws of England have for ever rejected every Roman Catholic.
“Thus a law of Russia, made at the beginning of the reign of Elizabeth,
most <26> wisely excludes from the possession of the crown every heir
possessed of anothermonarchy; andthusthelawof Portugaldisqualiﬁes
every foreigner who lays claim to the crown by right of blood.”*
Some celebrated authors, in other respects very learnedandjudicious,
have then deviated from the true principles in treating of renunciations.
They have largely expatiated on the rightsof childrenbornortobeborn,
of the transmission of those rights, &c. But they ought to have consid-
ered the succession, less as a property of the reigning family, than as a
law of the state. From this clear and incontestable principle we easily
deduce thewholedoctrineof renunciations.Thoserequiredorapproved
by the state are valid and sacred: they are fundamental laws:—those not
authorised by the state can only be obligatory on the prince who made
them. They cannot injure his posterity; and he himself may recede from
them in case the state stands in need of him and gives him an invitation:
for he owes his services to a people who had committed their safety to
his care. For the same reason, the prince cannot lawfully resign at an
unseasonable juncture, to the detriment of the state, and abandon in
imminent danger a nation that had put itself under his care.†
In ordinary cases, when the state may follow theestablishedrulewith-
out being exposed to very great and manifest danger, it is certain that
every descendent ought to succeed when the order of succession calls
him to the throne, however great may appear his incapacity to rule by
himself. This is a consequence of the spirit of the law that established
the succession: for the people had recourse to it, only to prevent the
troubles which would otherwise be almost inevitable at every change.
Now little advances would have been made towards obtaining this end,
if, at the death of a prince, the people were allowed to examine the ca-
pacity of his heir, before they acknowledged him for their sovereign.
* Spirit of Laws, Book XXVI. chap. XXIII. where may be seen very good political
reasons for these regulations.
† See further on.
§63. The order
of succession
ought com-
monly to
be kept.


Conclusion
Vattel’s ideas of modern patriotism and encouragement of theeconomy
are not among the most original in The Law of Nations. Nevertheless,
they are important because they show the weakness of any attempt to
capture Vattel’s position within the analytical framework of retrospec-
tive histories of international law or international relations.26 Besides
clarifying more thoroughly than previous thinkers the proper relation-
ship between the natural law of individuals and of states, Vattel used his
unusually broad intellectual interests to comment on the cultural, po-
litical, and economic conditions required for a viable system of inter-
national justice. Vattel saw his magnum opus as a contribution to a great
European debate on the science of legislation, a debate that analyzedthe
possibilities available to modern nations to secure liberty and cultural
advancement against constant interruption by war. The importance of
The Law of Nations therefore resides both in its systematic derivation of
international law from natural law and in its compelling synthesis of the
modern discourseof naturaljurisprudencewiththeevennewerlanguage
of political economy. These features help to explain the continuing ap-
peal of this text well into the nineteenth century among politicians, in-
ternational lawyers, and political theorists of every complexion.27
26. For two opposite interpretations, see A. Nussbaum, A Concise History of the
Law of Nations, 152, and Q. Wright, A Study of War, 336–37.
27. For the reception of Vattel, see C. G. Fenwick, “The Authority of Vattel,”
American Political Science Review 7 (1913): 395–410; F. S. Ruddy, “The Acceptance
of Vattel,” Grotian Society Papers (1972): 177–96; and H. The´venaz, “Vattel ou la
destine´e d’un livre,” Schweizerisches Jahrbuch fu¨r Internationales Recht, 14 (1957):
9–16.


xxi
a note on the texts
English Editions of The Law of Nations
Vattel’s Law of Nations was translated anonymously into Englishseveral
times in the eighteenth century. The ﬁrst edition of 1760 was based on
the French original Droit des gens of 1758. A Dublin translation of 1787
is remarkably ﬂuent and elegant, but it does not include the substantive
notes of the original nor, more importantly, the notes added to the post-
humous French edition of 1773 and intended by Vattel for a second edi-
tion he did not live to complete. Several English editions, including the
1916 Classics of International Lawedition,aresimilarlyﬂawedandbased
on the edition of 1760. However, two English editions from the end of
the eighteenth century include Vattel’s later thoughts. One, from 1793,
contains a pagination error. This has been corrected in the revised ver-
sion, London 1797, and the latter forms the basis for the present edition.
The 1797 edition has the beneﬁt of a detailed table of contents and mar-
gin titles for subsections.
There is no modern edition of The Law of Nations, but facsimiles of
the popular nineteenth-century editions by the London barristerJoseph
Chitty have appeared in recent times. These annotated editions (ﬁrst in
1834) and their reissue with further notes by Edward Ingraham (ﬁrst in
1852) were based on the 1797 London edition. Chitty helpfullyidentiﬁed
the notes that distinguished the 1797 edition from the earlier English
translation. He sought, however, to add much more to the text, as he
explained in a preface written in Chancery Lane in November 1833:
Many years have elapsed since the original work was published, long
before the invaluable decisions of Sir William Scott, Sir C. Robinson,
and Sir John Nichol, and other eminent Judges in the Courts of Ad-

xxii
a note on the texts
miralty, and Prize and other Courts; and the last edition upon which
any care was bestowed, was published in a.d. 1797; since which time,
and especially during the last general war, many most important rules
respecting the Law of Nations were established. The object of thepres-
ent Editor has, therefore, been to collect and condense, in numerous
notes, the modern rules and decisions, and to fortify the positions in the
text by references to other authors of eminence, and by which he hopes
that this edition will be found of more practical utility, without inter-
fering with the text, or materially increasing its size.
In consequence, Chitty’s text is overloaded with legal citations based on
the case law of the sea that emerged in the Napoleonic era. Vattel’swork
had become a textbook for law students in both Britain and North
America.
Some of Chitty’s notes remain useful and have on occasion been in-
corporated into the editorial apparatus for this edition. The present edi-
tion includes new footnotes, elucidating dates, events, works, and per-
sons referred to by Vattel. Posthumous additions to the French edition
of 1773, which were then translated in the edition of 1797, are identiﬁed
as such in the new notes. Translations of Vattel’s Latin citations have
come from the best modern editions, particularly from the Loeb Clas-
sical Library. For each translation, reference to the edition used can be
found in the bibliography of authors cited. In cases where no translation
could be found, or where the context of Vattel’s work required an
amended translation, the editors undertook the translation, and this is
signaled in the text by “trans. Eds.” All of the preceding new material
has been added to the 1797 text as numbered notes or as double square-
bracketed inserts within Vattel’s original notes.
Chitty lamented in 1833 that “he proposed to form an Index, so as to
render the work more readily accessible; but, in that desire, he has been
overruled by the publishers.” The present edition adds bibliographical
and biographical details of authors cited inthe text,followingupVattel’s
own sometimes obscure references. The bibliography of authors cited
includes and explains the short titles employed byVattelinhisfootnotes.
Page breaks in the 1797 edition have been indicated in the body of
the text by the use of angle brackets. For example, page 112 begins after
<112>.


a note on the texts
xxiii
chapter v
117
“What a door would this open for usurpers or malcontents!—It was to
avoid these inconveniences that the order of succession was established;
and nothing more wise could have been done; since by this means no
more is required than his being the king’s son, and his being actually
alive,—which can admit of no dispute: but on the other hand there is
no rule ﬁxed to judge of the capacity or incapacity to reign.”* Though
the succession was not established for the particular advantage of the
sovereign and his family, but for that of the state, the heir apparent has
nevertheless a right, to which justice requires that regard should be paid.
His right is subordinate to that of the nation, and to the safety of the
state; but it ought to take place when the public welfare does not oppose
it. <27>
These reasons have the greater weight, since the law or the state may
remedy the incapacity of the prince by nominating a regent, as is prac-
tised in cases of minority. This regent is, during the whole time of his
administration, invested with the royal authority; but he exercises it in
the king’s name.
The principles we have just established respecting the successive or
hereditary right, manifestly shew that a prince has no right to divide his
state among his children. Every sovereignty, properly so called, is, in its
own nature, one, and indivisible, since those who have united in society
cannot be separated in spite of themselves. Those partitions, socontrary
to the nature of sovereignty and the preservation of states, have been
much in use: but an end has been put to them, wherever the people, and
princes themselves, have had a clear view of their greatest interest, and
the foundation of their safety.
But when a prince has united several different nations under his au-
thority, his empire is then properly an assemblage of several societies
subject to the same head; and there exists no natural objection to his
dividing them among his children: he may distribute them, if there be
neither law nor compact to the contrary, and if each of those nations
consentstoreceivethesovereignheappointsforit.ForthisreasonFrance
* Memorial in behalf of Madame de Longueville, concerning the principality of
Neufchatel, in 1672.
§64. Of
regents.
§65. Indi-
visibility of
sovereignties.


118
book i: nations in themselves
was divisible under the two ﬁrst races.* But being entirely consolidated
under the third, it has since been considered as a single kingdom,—it
has become indivisible,—and a fundamental law has declared it so. That
law, wiselyprovidingforthepreservationandsplendourof thekingdom,
irrevocably unites to the crown all the acquisitions of its kings.
The same principles will also furnish us with the solution of a cele-
brated question. When the right of succession becomes uncertain in a
successive or hereditary state, and two or three competitors lay claim to
the crown,—it is asked, Who shall be the judge of their pretensions?
Some learned men, resting on the opinion that sovereigns are subject to
no other judge but God, have maintained that the competitors for the
crown, while their right remains uncertain, ought either to come to an
amicable compromise,—enter into articles among themselves,—chuse
arbitrators,—have recourse even to the drawing of lots,—or, ﬁnally, de-
termine the dispute by arms; and that the subjects cannot in any manner
decide the question. One might be astonished that celebrated authors
should have maintained such a doctrine. But since, even in speculative
philosophy, there is nothing so absurd as not to have been advanced by
one or other of the philosophers,† what can be expectedfromthehuman
mind, when seduced by interest or fear? What! in a question that con-
cerns <28> none so much as the nation,—that relates to a power estab-
lished only with a view to the happiness of the people,—in a quarrel
that is to decide for ever their dearest interests, and their very safety,—
are they to stand by as unconcerned spectators? Are they to allow stran-
gers, or the blind decision of arms, to appoint them a master, as a ﬂock
of sheep are to wait till it be determined whether they are to be delivered
up to the butcher, or restored to the care of their shepherd?
But, say they, the nation has divested itself of all jurisdiction, by giv-
ing itself up to a sovereign; it has submitted to the reigning family; it
* But it is to be observed that those partitions were not made without the appro-
bation and consent of the respective states.
† Nescio quomodo nihil tam absurde dici potest, quod non dicatur ab aliquophi-
losophorum. [[“I do not know why, but nothing can be said which is so absurd, that
it is not said by one or other of the philosophers.”]] Cicero, de Divinat.Lib. II[[119]].
§66. Who
are to decide
disputes
respecting the
succession to a
sovereignty.


chapter v
119
has given to those who are descended from that family a right which
nobody can take from them; it has established them its superiors, and
can no longer judge them. Very well! But does it not belong to that same
nation to acknowledge the person to whom its duty binds it, andprevent
its being delivered up to another? And since it has established the law of
succession, who is more capable or has a better right to identify the in-
dividual whom the fundamental law had in view, and has pointed out
as the successor? We may afﬁrm, then, without hesitation, that the de-
cision of this grand controversy belongs to the nation, and to the nation
alone. Even if the competitors have agreed among themselves, or have
chosen arbitrators, the nation is not obliged to submit to their regula-
tions, unless it has consented to the transaction or compromise,—
princes not acknowledged, and whose right is uncertain, not being in
any manner able to dispose of its obedience. The nation acknowledges
no superior judge in an affair that relates to its most sacred duties, and
most precious rights.
Grotius and Puffendorff differ in reality but little from our opinion;
but would not have the decision of the people or state called a juridical
sentence (judicium jurisdictionis). Well! be it so: we shall not dispute
about words. However, there is something more in the case than a mere
examination of the competitors’ rights, in order to submit to him who
has the best. All the disputes that arise in society are to be judged and
decided by the public authority. As soon as the right of succession is
found uncertain, the sovereign authority returns for a time to the body
of the state, which is to exercise it, either by itself, or by its representa-
tives, till the true sovereign be known. “The contest on this right sus-
pending the functions in the person of the sovereign, the authority nat-
urally returns to the subjects, not for them to retain it, but to prove on
which of the competitors it lawfully devolves, and then to commit it to
his hands. It would not be difﬁcult to support, by an inﬁnite number
of examples, a truth so evident by the light of reason: it is sufﬁcient to
remember that the states of France, after the death of Charles the Fair,17
terminated the famous dispute between Philip de Valois and the king of
17. Charles IV, king of France, r. 1322–28.

120
book i: nations in themselves
England (Edward III.),18 and that <29> those states, though subject to
him in whose favour they granted the decision, were nevertheless the
judges of the dispute.”*
Guicciardini, book XII.19 also shews that it was the states of Arragon
that decided the succession to that kingdom, in favour of Ferdinand,20
grandfather of Ferdinand21 the husband of Isabella queen of Castile,22
in preference to the other relations of Martin king of Arragon,23 who
asserted that the kingdom belonged to them.†
In the kingdom of Jerusalem also, it was the states that decided the
disputes of those who made pretensions to it; as is proved by several
examples in the foreign political history.‡
The states of the principality of Neufchatel have often, in the form
of a juridical sentence, pronounced on the succession to the sovereignty.
In the year 1707, they decided between a great number of competitors,
and their decision in favour of the king of Prussia was acknowledged
by all Europe in the treaty of Utrecht.
The better to secure the succession in a certain and invariable order,
it is at present an established rule in all Christian states (Portugal ex-
cepted) that no descendent of the sovereign can succeed to the crown,
unless he be the issue of a marriage that is conformable to the laws of
the country. As the nation has established the succession, to the nation
* Answer in behalf of Madame de Longueville, to a Memorial in behalf of Ma-
dame de Nemours.
† Ibid.
‡ See the same memorial, which quotes P. Labbe’s Royal Abridgement, page 501,
&c.
18. The dispute was over who would succeed to the throne after Charles IV died
without a male heir.
19. Francesco Guicciardini, The History of Italy, from the Year 1490, to 1532 . . . In
Twenty Books. Translated into English by the Chevalier AustinParkeGoddard (London,
1753–56), bk. 12, vol. 6, 395.
20. Ferdinand I, king of Aragon and Sicily, r. 1412–16.
21. Ferdinand II, king of Aragon, r. 1476–1516; king of Sicily, r. 1468–1516; king
of Naples, r. 1504–16; and king of Castile and Leo´n (as Ferdinand V), r. 1474–1504.
22. Isabella, queen of Castile, r. 1474–1504.
23. Martin I, king of Aragon, r. 1396–1410; king of Sicily as Martin II, r. 1409–10;
uncle of Ferdinand I.
§67. That the
right to the
succession
ought not to
depend on the
judgment of a
foreign power.


chapter v
121
alone belongs the power of acknowledging those who are capable of
succeeding; and consequently, on its judgment and laws alone must de-
pend the validity of the marriage of its sovereigns, and the legitimacy
of their birth.
If education had not the power of familiarising the human mind to
the greatest absurdities, is there any man of sense who would not be
struck with astonishment to see so many nations suffer the legitimacy
and right of their princes to depend on a foreign power? The court of
Rome has invented an inﬁnite number of obstructions and cases of in-
validity in marriages, and at the same time arrogates to itself the right
of judging of their validity, and of removing the obstructions; so that a
prince of its communion cannot in certain cases be so much his own
master, as to contract a marriage necessary to the safety of the state.Jane,
the only daughter of Henry IV. king of Castile,24 found this true by
cruel experience. Some rebels published abroad that she owed her birth
to Bertrand de la Cueva, the king’s favourite; and notwithstanding the
declarations and last will of that prince, who explicitly and invariably
acknowledged Jane for his daughter, and nominated her his heiress,they
called to the crown Isabella, Henry’s sister, and wife to Ferdinand heir
of Arragon. The grandees of Jane’s party had provided her a <30> pow-
erful resource, by negotiating a marriage between her and Alphonsus
king of Portugal:25 but as that prince was Jane’s uncle, it was necessary
to obtain a dispensation from the pope; and Pius II.26 who was in the
interest of Ferdinand and Isabella, refused to grant the dispensation,
though such alliances were then very common. These difﬁcultiescooled
the ardour of the Portuguese monarch, and abated the zeal of thefaith-
ful Castilians. Every thing succeeded with Isabella, and the unfortunate
Jane took the veil, in order to secure, by this heroic sacriﬁce, the peace
of Castile.*
24. Henry IV, king of Castile, r. 1454–74.
25. Alphonso V, r. 1438–81.
26. Pius II, r. 1458–64.
* I take this historical passage from M. Du Port de Tertre’s Conspiracies. To him
I refer; for I have not the original historians by me. However, I do not enter into the
question relating to the birth of Jane: this would here be of no use. The princess had


122
book i: nations in themselves
If theprince proceedsandmarriesnotwithstandingthepope’srefusal,
he exposes his dominions to the most fatal troubles. What would have
becomeof England,if thereformationhadnotbeenhappilyestablished,
when the pope presumed to declare Queen Elizabeth illegitimate, and
incapable of wearing the crown?
A great emperor, Lewis of Bavaria,27 boldly asserted the rights of his
crown in this respect. In the diplomatic code of the law of nations by
Leibnitz, we ﬁnd* two acts, in which that prince condemns, as an in-
vasion of the imperial authority, the doctrine that attributes toanyother
power but his own, the right of granting dispensations, and of judging
of the validity of marriages, in the places under his jurisdiction: but he
was neither well supported in his life-time, nor imitated by his successors.
not been declared a bastard according to the laws; the king acknowledged her for his
daughter; and besides, whether she was or was not legitimate, the inconveniences
resulting from the pope’s refusal still remained the same with respect to her and the
king of Portugal. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
* P. 154 Forma divortii matrimonialis inter Johannem ﬁlium regis Bohemiae &
Margaretham ducissam Karinthiae. This divorce is given by the emperor on account
of the impotency of the husband, per auctoritatem, says he, nobis rite debitam &
concessam. [[“A form of matrimonial divorce between John, son of the king of Bo-
hemia, and Margaret, Duchess of Karinthia.” “. . . by authority . . . duly owed and
granted to us” (trans. Eds.).]]
P. 156. Forma dispensationis super afﬁnitate consanguinitatis inter Ludovicum
marchionem Brandenburg&MargarethamducissamKarinthiae,necnonlegitimatio
liberorum procreandorum, factae per dom. Ludovic. IV. Rom. imper. [[“A form of
dispensation in respect of afﬁnity of blood between Ludwig, Marquis of Branden-
burg, and Margaret, Duchess of Karinthia, together with a legitimation of any chil-
dren to be begotten,madebytheauthorityof Ludwig IV,Emperorof theRomans.”]]
It is only human law, says the emperor, that hinders these marriages intra gradus
afﬁnitatis sanguinis, praesertim intra fratres & sorores. De cujus legis praeceptis dis-
pensare solummodo pertinet ad auctoritatem imperatoris seu principisRomanorum.
[[“within the degrees of afﬁnity of blood, especially between brothers and sisters.
Dispensing of the requirements of this law is a matter for the authority of the em-
peror or prince of the Romans” (trans. Eds.).]] He then opposes and condemns the
opinion of those who dare to say that these dispensations depend on ecclesiastics.
Both this act and the former are dated in the year 1341. [[Note added in 1773/1797
editions.]]
27. Louis of Bavaria, Holy Roman Emperor, r. 1328–47.

chapter v
123
Finally, there are states whose sovereign may chuse his successor, and
even transfer the crown to another during his life: these are commonly
called patrimonial kingdoms or states: but let us reject so unjust and so
improper an epithet, which can only serve to inspire some sovereigns
with ideas very opposite to those they ought to entertain.Wehaveshewn
(§61) that a state cannot be a patrimony. But it may happen thatanation,
either through unbounded conﬁdence in its prince, or for some other
reason, has intrusted him with the care of appointing his successor, and
even consented to receive, if he thinks proper, another sovereign from
his hands. Thus we see that Peter I.28 em-<31>peror of Russia, nomi-
nated his wife29 to succeed him, though he had children.
But when a prince chuses his successor, or when he cedes the crown
to another,—properly speaking, he only nominates, by virtue of the
power with which he is, either expressly or by tacit consent, intrusted—
he only nominates, I say, the person who is to govern the state after him.
This neither is nor can be an alienation, properly so called. Every true
sovereignty is, in its own nature, unalienable. We shall be easily con-
vinced of this, if we pay attention to the origin and end of political
society, and of the supreme authority. A nation becomes incorporated
into a society, to labour for the common welfare as it shall think proper,
and toliveaccordingtoitsownlaws.Withthisviewitestablishesapublic
authority. If it intrusts that authority to a prince, even with the power
of transferring it to other hands, this can never take place without the
express and unanimous consent of the citizens, with the right of really
alienating or subjecting the state to another body politic: for the indi-
viduals who have formed this society, entered into it in order to live in
an independent state, and not under a foreign yoke. Let not any other
source of this right be alleged in objection to our argument, asconquest,
for instance; for we have already shewn (§60) that these differentsources
ultimately revert to the true principles on which all just governmentsare
founded. While the victor does not treat his conquest according to those
principles, the state of war still in some measure subsists: but the mo-
28. Peter I, r. 1682–1725.
29. Marta Skavronskaya, Catherine I, 1684–1727.
§68. Of states
called patri-
monial.
§69. Every
true sover-
eignty is
unalienable.


124
book i: nations in themselves
ment he places it in a civil state, his rights are proportioned by the prin-
ciples of that state.
I know that many authors, and particularly Grotius,* give long enu-
merations of the alienations of sovereignties. But the examples often
prove only the abuse of power, not the right. And besides, the people
consented to the alienation, either willingly or by force. What could the
inhabitants of Pergamus, Bithynia, and Cyrene do, when their kings
gave them, by their last wills, to the Roman people? Nothing remained
for them, but to submit with a good grace to so powerful a legatee. To
furnish an example capable of serving as an authority, they should have
produced an instance of a people resisting a similar bequest of their sov-
ereign, and whose resistance had been generally condemned as unjust
and rebellious. Had Peter I. who nominated his wife to succeed him,
attempted to subject his empire to the grand signor, or to some other
neighbouring power, can we imagine that the Russians would have suf-
fered it, or that their resistance would have passed for a revolt? We do
not ﬁnd in Europe any great state that is reputed alienable. If somepetty
principalities have been considered as such, it is because they were not
true sovereignties. They wereﬁefsof theem-<32>pire,enjoyingagreater
or lesser degree of liberty: their masters made a trafﬁc of the rights they
possessed over those territories: but they could not withdraw them from
a dependence on the empire.
Let us conclude then, that, as the nation alone has a right to subject
itself to a foreign power, the right of really alienating the state can never
belong to the sovereign, unless it be expressly given him by the entire
body of the people.† Neither are we to presume that he possesses a right
* De Jure Belli & Pacis, Lib. I. Cap. III. §12.
† The pope [[Innocent III, r. 1198–1216]] opposing the attempt made upon En-
gland by Louis the son of Philip Augustus [[Louis VIII, r. 1223–26]], and alleging,as
his pretext, that John [[John, king of England, r. 1199–1216]] had rendered himself
a vassal of the holy see, received for answer, among other arguments, “thatasovereign
had no right to dispose of his states without the consent of his barons, who were
bound to defend them.” On which occasion the French nobles unanimously ex-
claimed that they would, to their last breath, maintain this truth—“that no prince
can, of his own private will, give away his kingdom, or render it tributary, and thus


chapter v
125
to nominate his successor or surrender the sceptre to other hands,—a
right which must be founded on an express consent, on a law of the
state, or on long custom, justiﬁed by the tacit consent of the people.
If the power of nominating his successor is intrusted tothesovereign,
he ought to have nootherviewinhischoice,buttheadvantageandsafety
of the state. He himself was established only for this end (§39); the lib-
erty of transferring his power to another could then be granted to him
only with the same view. It would be absurd toconsideritasaprerogative
useful totheprince, andwhichhemayturntohisownprivateadvantage.
Peter the Great proposed only the welfare of the empire when he left
the crown to his wife. He knew that heroine to be the most capable
person to follow his views, and perfect the great things he had begun,
and therefore preferred her to his son, who was still too young. If we
often found on the throne such elevated minds as Peter’s, a nation could
not adopt a wiser plan in order to ensure to itself a good government,
than to intrust the prince, by a fundamental law, with the power of ap-
pointing his successor. This would be a much more certain methodthan
the order of birth. The Roman emperors who had no male children
appointed a successor by adoption. To this custom Rome was indebted
for a series of sovereigns unequalled in history,—Nerva, Trajan,Adrian,
Antoninus, Marcus Aurelius,—what princes! Does the right of birth of-
ten place such on the throne?
We may go still farther, and boldly assert, that, as the safety of the
whole nation is deeply interested in so important a transaction, the con-
sent and ratiﬁcation of the people or state is necessary to give it full and
entire effect,—at least their tacit consent and ratiﬁcation. If an emperor
of Russia thought proper to nominate for his successor a person noto-
riously unworthy of the crown, it is not at all probable that vast empire
would blindly submit to so pernicious an appointment. And who shall
presume <33> to blame a nation for refusing to run headlong to ruin out
of respect to the last orders of its prince? As soon as the people submit
to thesovereignappointedtoruleoverthem,theytacitlyratifythechoice
enslave the nobility.” Velly’s Hist. of France, Vol. III. p. 491. [[Note added in 1773/
1797 editions.]]
§70. Duty of a
prince who is
empowered to
nominate his
successor.
§71. He
must have at
least a tacit
ratiﬁcation.


126
book i: nations in themselves
made by the last prince; and the new monarch enters into all the rights
of his predecessor.
chapter vi
Principal Objects of a good Government; and ﬁrst to
provide for the Necessities of the Nation.
After these observations on the constitution of the state, let us now pro-
ceed to the principal objects of a good government. We have seen above
(§§41 and 42) that the prince, on his being invested with the sovereign
authority, is charged with the duties of the nation in relation to govern-
ment. In treating of the principal objects of a wise administration, we
at once shew the duties of a nation towards itself, and those of the sov-
ereign towards his people.
A wise conductor of the state will ﬁnd in the objects of civil society
the general rule and indication of his duties. The society is established
with the view of procuring, to those who are its members, the neces-
saries, conveniences, and even pleasures of life, and, in general, every
thing necessary to their happiness,—of enabling each individual peace-
ably to enjoy his own property, and to obtain justice with safety and
certainty,—and, ﬁnally, of defending themselves in a body against all
external violence (§15). The nation, or its conductor, should ﬁrst apply
to the business of providing for all the wants of the people, and pro-
ducing a happy plenty of all the necessaries of life,withitsconveniences,
and innocent and laudable enjoyments. As an easy life without luxury
contributes to the happiness of men, it likewise enables them to labour
with greater safety and success after their own perfection, which is their
grand and principal duty, and one of the ends they ought to have inview
when they unite in society.
To succeed in procuring this abundance of every thing, it is necessary
to take care that there be a sufﬁcient number of able workmen in every
useful or necessary profession. An attentive application on the part of
government, wise regulations, and assistance properly granted, will
§72. The
object of
society points
out the duties
of the
sovereign.
He ought to
procure plenty.
§73. To take
care that there
be a sufﬁcient
number of
workmen.


chapter vi
127
produce this effect, without using constraint, which is always fatal to
industry.
Those workmen that are useful ought to be retained in the state; to
succeed in retaining them, the public authority has certainly a right to use
constraint, if necessary. Every citizen owes his personal services to his
country; and a mechanic, in particular, who has been reared, educated,
and instructed in its bosom, cannot lawfully leave it, and carry to a for-
eign land that industry which he acquired at home, unless his country
has no occasion for him, or he cannot there obtain the just fruit of his
<34> labour and abilities. Employment must then be procured for him;
and if, while able to obtain a decent livelihood in his own country, he
would without reason abandon it, the state has a right to detain him.
But a very moderate use ought to be made of this right, and only in
important or necessary cases. Liberty is the soul of abilitiesandindustry:
frequently a mechanic or an artist, after having long travelled abroad, is
attracted home to his native soil by a natural affection, and returns more
expert and betterqualiﬁedtorenderhiscountryusefulservices.If certain
extraordinary cases be excepted, it is best in this affair to practise the
mild methods of protection, encouragement, &c. and to leave the rest
to that natural love felt by all men for the places of their birth.
As to those emissaries who come into a country to entice away useful
subjects, the sovereign has a right to punish them severely, and has just
cause of complaint against the power by whom they are employed.
In another place, we shall treat more particularly of the general ques-
tion, whether a citizen be permitted to quit the society of which he is a
member. The particular reasons concerning useful workmen are sufﬁ-
cient here.
The state ought to encourage labour, to animate industry, to excite
abilities, to propose honours, rewards, privileges, and so to order mat-
ters that every one may live by his industry. In this particular, England
deserves to be held up as an example. The parliament incessantly at-
tends to these important affairs, in which neither care nor expense is
spared. And do we not even see a society of excellent citizens formed
with this view, and devoting considerable sums to this use? Premiums
are also distributed in Ireland to the mechanics who most distinguish
§74. To
prevent the
emigration
of those that
are useful.
§75. Emis-
saries who
entice them
away.
§76. Labour
and industry
must be
encouraged.


128
book i: nations in themselves
themselves in their profession. Can such a state fail of being powerful
and happy?
chapter vii
Of the Cultivation of the Soil.
Of all the arts, tillage, or agriculture, is doubtless the most useful and
necessary, as being the source whence the nation derives its subsistence.
The cultivation of the soil causes it to produce an inﬁnite increase; it
forms the surest resource, and the most solid fund of riches and com-
merce, for a nation that enjoys a happy climate.
This object then deserves the utmost attention of the government.
The sovereign ought to neglect no means of rendering the land under
hisjurisdiction as wellcultivatedaspossible.Heoughtnottoalloweither
communities or private persons to acquire large tracts of land, and leave
them uncultivated. Those rights of common, which deprive the propri-
etor of the free liberty of <35> disposing of his land,—which will not
allow him to inclose and cultivateitinthemostadvantageousmanner,—
those rights, I say, are inimical to the welfare of the state, and ought to
be suppressed, or reduced to just bounds. Notwithstanding the intro-
ductionof privatepropertyamongthecitizens,thenationhasstillaright
to take the most effectual measures to cause the aggregate soil of the
country toproducethegreatestandmostadvantageousrevenuepossible.
The government ought carefully to avoid every thing capable of dis-
couraging the husbandman, or of diverting him from the labours of
agriculture. Those taxes,—those excessive and ill-proportioned impo-
sitions, the burthen of which falls almost entirely on the cultivators,—
and the oppressions they suffer from the ofﬁcers who levy them,—
deprive the unhappy peasant of the means of cultivating the earth, and
depopulate the country. Spain is the most fertile and the worstcultivated
country in Europe. The church there possesses too much land; and the
contractors for the royal magazines, being authorised to purchase at a
low price all the corn they ﬁnd in the possession of a peasant,abovewhat
§77. The
utility of
tillage.
§78. Regula-
tions neces-
sary in this
respect—
For the distri-
bution of
land.
§79. For the
protection of
husbandmen.


chapter vii
129
is necessary for the subsistence of himself and his family, so greatly dis-
courage the husbandman, that he sows no more corn than is barely nec-
essary for the support of his own household. Hence the frequentscarcity
in a country capable of feeding its neighbours.
Another abuse injurious to agriculture is the contempt cast upon the
husbandman. The tradesmen in cities,—even the most servile mechan-
ics,—the idle citizens,—consider him that cultivates the earth with a
disdainful eye: they humble and discourage him: they dare to despise a
profession that feeds the human race,—the natural employment of
man. A little insigniﬁcant haberdasher, a tailor, places far beneath him
the beloved employment of the ﬁrst consuls and dictators of Rome!
China has wisely prevented this abuse: agriculture is there held in hon-
our; and to preserve this happy mode of thinking, theemperorhimself,
followed by his whole court, annually, on a solemn day, sets his hand
to the plough, and sows a small piece of land. Hence China is the best
cultivated country in the world: it feeds an immense multitude of in-
habitants who at ﬁrst sight appear to the traveller too numerous for the
space they occupy.
The cultivation of the soil deserves the attention of the government,
not only on account of the invaluable advantages that ﬂow from it, but
from its being an obligation imposed by nature on mankind. The whole
earth is destined to feed its inhabitants; but this it would be incapable
of doing, if it were uncultivated. Every nation is then obliged by the law
of nature to cultivate the land that has fallen to its share; and it has no
right to enlarge its boundaries, or have recourse to the assistanceof other
nations, but in proportion as the land in its possession is incapable of
furnishing it with necessaries. Those nations (such as the ancient Ger-
mans, and some modern Tartars), who <36> inhabit fertile countries,
but disdain to cultivate their lands, and chuse rather to live by plunder,
are wanting to themselves, are injurious to all their neighbours, and de-
serve to be extirpated as savage and pernicious beasts. There are others,
who, to avoid labour, chuse to live only by hunting, and their ﬂocks.
This might, doubtless, be allowed in the ﬁrst ages of the world, when
the earth, without cultivation, produced more than wassufﬁcienttofeed
its small number of inhabitants. But at present, when the human race
§80.
Husbandry
ought to be
placed in an
honourable
light.
§81. The culti-
vation of the
soil, a natural
obligation.


130
book i: nations in themselves
is so greatly multiplied, it could not subsist if all nations were disposed
to live in that manner. Those who still pursue this idle mode of life,
usurp more extensive territories than, with a reasonable share of labour,
they would have occasion for, and have therefore no reason to complain,
if other nations, more industrious, and too closely conﬁned, come to
take possession of a part of those lands. Thus, though the conquest of
the civilised empires of Peru and Mexico was a notorious usurpation,
the establishment of many colonies on the continent of North America
might, on their conﬁning themselves within just bounds, be extremely
lawful. The people of those extensive tracts rather ranged through than
inhabited them.
The establishment of public granaries is an excellent regulation for
preventing scarcity. But great care should be taken to prevent theirbeing
managed with a mercantile spirit, and with views of proﬁt. This would
be establishing a monopoly, which would not be the less unlawful, for
its being carried on by the magistrate. These granaries should be ﬁlled
in times of the greatest plenty, and take off the corn that would lie on
the husbandman’s hands, or be carried in too great quantities to foreign
countries: they should be opened when corn is dear, and keep it at a
reasonable price. If in a time of plenty they prevent that necessary com-
modity from easily falling to a very low price, this inconvenienceismore
than compensated by the relief they afford in times of dearth: or rather,
it is no inconvenience at all: for, when corn is sold extremely cheap, the
manufacturer, in order to obtain a preference, is tempted to undersell
his neighbours, by offering his goods at a price which he is afterwards
obliged to raise (and this produces great disorders in commerce, by put-
ting it out of its course); or he accustoms himself to an easy life, which
he cannot support in harder times. It would be of advantage to manu-
factures and to commerce to have the subsistence of workmen regularly
kept at a moderate and nearly equal price. In short, public granarieskeep
in the state quantities of corn that would be sent abroad at too cheap a
rate, and must be purchased again, and brought back at a very great
expense after a bad harvest; which is a real loss to the nation. These es-
tablishments, however, do not hinder the corn trade. If the country,one
year with another, produces more than is sufﬁcient for the support of
§82. Of public
granaries.


chapter viii
131
her inhabitants, the superﬂuity will still be sent abroad; but it will be
sent at a higher and fairer price. <37>
chapter viii
Of Commerce.
It is commerce that enables individuals and whole nations to procure
thosecommoditieswhichtheystandinneedof,butcannotﬁndathome.
Commerce is divided into home and foreign trade. The former is that
carried on in the state between the severalinhabitants;thelatteriscarried
on with foreign nations.
The home trade of a nation is of great use; it furnishes all the citi-
zens with the means of procuring whatever they want, as either nec-
essary, useful, or agreeable: it causes a circulation of money, excites
industry, animates labour, and, by affording subsistencetoagreatnum-
ber of people, contributes to increase the population and power of the
state.
The same reasons shew the use of foreign trade, which is moreover
attended with these two advantages:—1. By trading with foreigners, a
nation procures such things as neither nature nor art can furnish in the
country it occupies. And secondly, if its foreign trade be properly di-
rected, it increases the riches of the nation, and may become the source
of wealth and plenty. Of this the example of the Carthaginians among
the ancients, and that of the English and Dutch among the moderns,
afford remarkable proofs. Carthage, by her riches, counter-balancedthe
fortune, courage, and greatness of Rome.Hollandhasamassedimmense
sums in her marshes; a company of her merchants possesses wholeking-
doms in the East, and the governor of Batavia exercises command over
the monarchs of India. To what a degree of power and glory is England
arrived! Formerly her warlike princes and inhabitants made glorious
conquests which they afterwards lost by those reverses of fortune so fre-
quent in war: at present, it is chieﬂy commerce that places in her hand
the balance of Europe.
§83. Of home
and foreign
trade.
§84. Utility
of the home
trade.
§85. Utility of
foreign trade.

132
book i: nations in themselves
Nations are obliged to cultivate the home trade,—ﬁrst, because it is
clearly demonstrated from the law of nature, that mankind ought mu-
tually to assist each other, and, as far as in their power, contribute to the
perfection and happiness of their fellow-creatures: whence arises, after
the introduction of private property, the obligation to resign to others,
at a fair price, those things which they have occasion for, and which we
do not destine for our own use. Secondly, society being established with
the view that each may procure whatever things are necessary to his own
perfection and happiness,—and a home trade being the means of ob-
taining them,—the obligations to carry on and improve this trade are
derived from the very compact on which the society wasformed.Finally,
being advantageous to <38> the nation, it is a duty the people owe to
themselves, to make this commerce ﬂourish.
For the same reason, drawn from the welfare of the state, and also to
procure for the citizens every thing they want, a nation is obliged to
promote and carry on a foreign trade. Of all the modern states,England
is most distinguished in this respect. The parliament have theireyescon-
stantly ﬁxed on this important object; they effectually protect the nav-
igation of the merchants, and, by considerable bounties, favour the ex-
portation of superﬂuous commodities and merchandises. In a very
sensible production,* may be seen the valuable advantages thatkingdom
has derived from such judicious regulations.
Let us now see what are the laws of nature and the rights of nations
in respect to the commerce they carry on with each other. Men are
obliged mutually to assist each other as much as possible, and to
contribute to the perfection and happiness of their fellow-creatures
(Prelim. §10); whence it follows, as we have said above (§86), that,
after the introduction of private property, it became a duty to sell to
each other at a fair price what the possessor himself has no occasion
for, and what is necessary to others; because, since that introduction
of private property, no one can by any other means procure the dif-
* [[Louis-Joseph Plumard de Danguel,]] Remarks on the Advantages and Dis-
advantages of France and Great Britain with respect to Commerce.
§86. Obliga-
tion to culti-
vate the home
trade.
§87. Obliga-
tion to carry
on foreign
trade.
§88. Founda-
tion of the
laws of
commerce.


chapter viii
133
ferent things that may be necessary or useful to him, and calculated to
render life pleasant and agreeable. Now, since right springs from ob-
ligation (Prelim. §3), the obligation whichwehavejustestablishedgives
every man the right of procuring the things he wants, by purchasing
them at a reasonable price from those who have themselves nooccasion
for them.
We have also seen (Prelim. §5) that men could not free themselves
from the authority of the laws of nature by uniting in civil society, and
that the whole nation remains equally subjectto thoselawsinitsnational
capacity; so that the natural and necessary law of nations is no other
than the law of nature properly applied to nations or sovereign states
(Prelim. §6): from all which it follows, that a nation has a right to pro-
cure, at an equitable price, whatever articles it wants, by purchasing
them of other nations who have no occasion for them. This is the foun-
dation of the right of commerce between different nations, and, in par-
ticular, of the right of buying.
We cannot apply the same reasoning to the rightof sellingsuchthings
as we want to part with. Every man and every nation being perfectly at
liberty to buy a thing that is to be sold, or not to buy it, and to buy it
of one rather than of another,—the law of nature gives to no person
whatsoever any kind of right to sell what belongs to him to another who
does not wish to buy it; neither has any nation the right of selling her
commodities or merchandise to a people who are unwilling to have
them. <39>
Every state has consequently a right to prohibit the entrance of for-
eign merchandises; and the nations that are affected by such prohibition
have no right to complain of it, as if they had been refused an ofﬁce of
humanity. Their complaints would be ridiculous, since their only
ground of complaint would be, that a proﬁt is refused to them by that
nation, who does not chuse they should make it at her expense. It is,
however, true, that if a nation was very certain that the prohibition of
her merchandises was not founded onany reasondrawnfromthewelfare
of the state that prohibited them, she would have cause to consider this
conduct as a mark of ill-will shewn in this instance, and to complain of
Right of
buying.
§89. Right
of selling.
§90. Prohibi-
tion of foreign
merchandises.


134
book i: nations in themselves
it on that footing. But it would be very difﬁcult for the excluded nation
to judge with certainty that the state had no solid or apparent reason for
making such a prohibition.
By the manner in which we have shewn a nation’s right to buy of
another what it wants, it is easy to see that this right is not one of those
called perfect, and that are accompanied with a right to use constraint.
Let us now distinctly explain the nature of a right which may give room
for disputes of a very serious nature. You have a right to buy of others
such things as you want, and of which they themselves have no need;
you make application to me: I am not obliged to sell them to you, if I
myself have any occasion for them. In virtue of the naturallibertywhich
belongs to all men, it is I who am to judge whether I have occasion for
them myself, or can conveniently sell them to you; and you havenoright
to determine whether I judge well or ill, because you have no authority
over me. If I, improperly, and without any good reason, refuse to sell
you at a fair price what you want, I offend against my duty: you may
complain of this; but you must submit to it; and you cannot attempt to
force me, without violating my natural right, and doing me an injury.
The right of buying the things we want is then only an imperfect right,
like that of a poor man to receive alms of the rich man; if the latter
refuses to bestow it, the poor man may justly complain; but he has no
right to take it by force.
If it be asked, what a nation has a right to do in case of extreme
necessity,—this question will be answered in its proper place in the fol-
lowing book, Chap. IX.
Since then a nation cannot have a natural right to sell her merchan-
dises to another that is unwilling to purchase them,—since she has only
an imperfect right to buy what she wants of others,—since it belongs
only to these last to judge whether it be proper for them to sell or not—
and, ﬁnally, since commerce consists in mutually buying and selling all
sorts of commodities,—it is evident that it depends on the will of any
nation to carry on commerce with another, or to let it alone. If she be
willing to allow this to one, it depends on the nation to permit it under
such conditions as she shall think proper. For in permitting another na-
§91. Nature of
the right of
buying.
§92. Every
nation is to
chuse how far
it will engage
in commerce.


chapter viii
135
tion to trade with her, she grants that other a <40> right; and every one
is at liberty to afﬁx what conditions he pleases to a right which he grants
of his own accord.
Men and sovereign states may, by their promises, enter into a perfect
obligation with respect to eachother, inthingswherenaturehasimposed
only an imperfect obligation. A nation, not having naturally a perfect
right to carry on a commerce with another, may procure it by an agree-
ment or treaty. This right is then acquired only by treaties, and relates
to that branch of the law of nations termed conventional (Prelim. §24).
The treaty that gives the right of commerce, is the measure and rule of
that right.
A simple permission to carry on commerce with a nation gives no
perfect right to that commerce. For if I merely and simply permit you
to do any thing, I do not give you any right to do it afterwards in spite
of me:—you may make use of my condescension as long as it lasts; but
nothing prevents me from changing my will. As then every nation has
a right to chuse whether she will or will not trade with another, and on
what conditions she is willing to do it (§92),—if one nation has for a
time permitted another to come and trade in the country,sheisatliberty,
whenever she thinks proper, to prohibit that commerce,—to restrain
it,—to subject it to certain regulations; and the people who before car-
ried it on cannot complain of injustice.
Let us only observe, that nations, as well as individuals, are obliged
to trade together for the common beneﬁt of the human race, because
mankind stand in need of each other’s assistance (Prelim. §§10, 11, and
Book I. §88): still however, each nation remains at liberty to consider, in
particular cases, whether it be convenient for her to encourage,orpermit
commerce; and as our duty to ourselves is paramount to our duty to
others,—if one nation ﬁnds herself in such circumstances, that she
thinks foreign commerce dangerous to the state, she may renounce and
prohibit it. This the Chinese have done for a long time together. But,
again, it is only for very serious and important reasons that her duty to
herself should dictate such a reserve; otherwise, she could not refuse to
comply with the general duties of humanity.
§93. How a
nation acquires
a perfect right
to a foreign
trade.
§94. Of the
simple per-
mission of
commerce.


136
book i: nations in themselves
We have seen what are the rights that nations derive from naturewith
regard to commerce, and how they may acquire others by treaties:—let
us now examine whether they can found any on long custom. To de-
termine this question in a solid manner, it is necessary ﬁrst to observe,
that there are rights which consist in a simple power: they are called in
Latin, jura merae facultatis, rights of mere ability. They are such in their
own nature, that he who possesses them may use them or not, as he
thinks proper,—being absolutely free from all restraint in this respect;
so that the actions that relate to the exercise of these rights, are acts of
mere free will, that may be done or not done according to pleasure. It is
manifest that rights of this kind cannot be lost by prescription on ac-
count of their not <41> being used, since prescription is only founded
on consent legitimately presumed; and that, if I possess a right which is
of such a nature that I may or may not use it as I think proper, without
any person having a right to prescribe to me on the subject, it cannot be
presumed, frommyhavinglongforbornetouseit,thatIthereforeintend
to abandon it. This right is then imprescriptible, unless I have been for-
bidden or hindered from making use of it, and have obeyed with suf-
ﬁcient marks of consent. Let us suppose, for instance, that I am entirely
at liberty to grind my corn at any mill I please, and that during a very
considerable time, a century if you please, I have made use of the same
mill:—as I have done in this respect what I thought proper, it is not to
be presumed, from this long-continued use of the same mill, that I
meant to deprive myself of the right of grinding at any other; and con-
sequently, my right cannot be lost by prescription. But now suppose,
that, on my resolving to make use of another mill, the owner of the
former opposes it, and announces to me a prohibition;—if I obey his
prohibition without necessity, and without opposition, though I have it
in my power to defend myself, and know my right, this right is lost,
because my conduct affords grounds for a legitimate presumption that
I chose to abandon it.—Let us apply these principles.—Since itdepends
on the will of each nation to carry on commerce with another, or not
to carry it on, and to regulate the manner in which it chuses to carry it
on (§92), the right of commerce is evidently a right of mere ability (jus
merae facultatis), a simple power,—and consequently is imprescriptible.
§95. Whether
the laws
relating to
commerce are
subject to
prescription.


chapter viii
137
Thus, although two nations have traded together, without interruption,
during a century, this long usage does not give any right to either of
them; nor is the one obliged on this account to suffer the other to come
and sell its merchandises, or to buy others:—they both preservethedou-
ble right of prohibiting the entrance of foreign merchandise, and of
selling their own wherever people are willing to buy them. Although the
English have from time immemorial been accustomed to get wine from
Portugal, they are not on that account obliged to continue the trade,
and have not lost the liberty of purchasing their wines elsewhere. Al-
though they have, in the same manner, been long accustomed to sell
their cloth in that kingdom, they have, nevertheless, a right to transfer
that trade to any other country: and the Portuguese, on their part, are
not obliged by this long custom, either to sell their winestotheEnglish,
or to purchase their cloths. If a nation desires any right of commerce
which shall no longer depend on the will of another, she must acquire
it by treaty.30
What has been just said may be applied to the rights of commerce
acquired by treaties. If a nation has by this method procured the liberty
of selling certain merchandises to another, she does not lose her right,
though a great number of years are suffered to elapse without its being
used; because this right is a <42> simple power, jus merae facultatis,
which she is at liberty to use or not, whenever she pleases.
Certain circumstances, however, may render a different decisionnec-
essary, because they imply a change in the natureof therightinquestion.
For instance, if it appears evident, that the nation granting this right
granted it only with the view of procuring a species of merchandise of
which she stands in need,—and if the nation which obtained the right
of selling, neglects to furnish those merchandises, and another offers to
bring them regularly, on condition of having an exclusive privilege,—it
30. Joseph Chitty noted, “This perpetual obligation to purchase Port wines from
Portugal in exchange for British wool cloths was established by the celebrated treaty
of Methuen, a.d. 1703 (so called because concludedby SirP.Methuen)withPortugal.
A treaty which has been censured by some as evidently advantageous to Portugal and
disadvantageous to Great Britain.” Chitty cited Adam Smith, Dean Tucker, and his
own Commercial Law in support.
§96. Impre-
scriptibility of
rights founded
on treaty.

138
book i: nations in themselves
appears certain that the privilege may be granted to the latter. Thus the
nation that had the right of selling, would lose it, because she had not
fulﬁlled the tacit condition.
Commerce is a common beneﬁt to a nation; and allhermembershave
an equal right to it. Monopoly therefore, in general, is contrary to the
rights of the citizens. However, this rule has its exceptions, suggested
even by the interest of the nation; and a wise government may, incertain
cases, justly establish monopolies. There are commercial enterprisesthat
cannot be carried on without an energy that requiresconsiderablefunds,
which surpass the ability of individuals. There are others that would
soon become ruinous, were they not conducted with great prudence,
with one regular spirit, and according to well-supported maxims and
rules. These branches of trade cannot be indiscriminately carried on by
individuals: companiesarethereforeformed,undertheauthorityof gov-
ernment; and these companies cannot subsist without anexclusiveprivi-
lege. It is therefore advantageous to the nation to grant them: hencehave
arisen, in different countries, those powerful companies that carry on
commerce with the East. When the subjects of the United Provinces
established themselves in the Indies on the ruin of their enemies the
Portuguese, individual merchants would not havedared tothinkof such
an arduous enterprise; and the state itself, wholly taken up with the de-
fence of its liberty against the Spaniards, had not the means of attempt-
ing it.
It is also certain beyond all doubt, that, whenever any individual of-
fers, on condition of obtaining an exclusive privilege, to establish a par-
ticular branch of commerce or manufacture which the nation has not
the means of carrying on, the sovereign may grant him such privilege.
But whenever any branch of commerce may be left open to thewhole
nation,withoutproducinganyinconvenienceorbeinglessadvantageous
to the state, a restriction of that commercetoafewprivilegedindividuals
is a violation of the rights of all the other citizens. And even when such
a commerce requires considerable expenses to maintain forts, men of
war, &c. this being a national affair, the state may defray those expenses,
and, as an encouragement to industry, leave the proﬁts of the trade to
the merchants. This is sometimes done in England. <43>
§97. Of
monopolies,
and trading
companies,
with exclusive
privileges.


chapter ix
139
The conductor of a nation ought to take particular care to encourage
the commerce that is advantageous to his people, and to suppress or lay
restraints upon that which is to their disadvantage. Gold and silver hav-
ing become the common standard of the value of all the articles of com-
merce, the trade that brings into the state a greater quantity of these
metals than it carries out, is an advantageous trade; and, on the contrary,
that is a ruinous one, whichcausesmoregoldandsilvertobesentabroad,
than it brings home. This is what is called the balance of trade. The
ability of those who have the direction of it, consists in making that
balance turn in favour of the nation.
Of all the measures that a wise government may take with this view,
we shall only touch here on import duties. When the conductors of a
state, without absolutely forcing trade, are nevertheless desirous of di-
verting it into other channels, they lay such duties on the merchandises
they would discourage, as will prevent their consumption. Thus French
wines are charged with very high duties in England, while the duties on
those of Portugal are very moderate,—because England sells few of her
productions to France, while she sells large quantities to Portugal.There
is nothing in this conduct that is not very wise and extremely just; and
France has no reason to complain of it,—every nation having an un-
doubted right to make what conditions she thinks proper, with respect
to receiving foreign merchandises, and being even at liberty to refuse
taking them at all.
chapter ix
Of the Care of the Public Ways of Communication,
and the Right of Toll.
The utility of high-ways, bridges, canals, and, in a word, of all safe and
commodious ways of communication, cannot be doubted. They facili-
tate the trade between one place and another, and render theconveyance
of merchandise less expensive, as well as more certain and easy. Themer-
chants are enabled to sell at a better price, and to obtain the preference;
§98. Balance
of trade, and
attention of
government in
this respect.
§99. Import
duties.
§100. Utility
of high-ways,
canals, &c.


140
book i: nations in themselves
an attraction is held out to foreigners, whose merchandises are carried
through the country, and diffuse wealth in all the places through which
they pass. France and Holland feel the happy consequences of this from
daily experience.
One of the principal things that ought to employ the attention of the
government with respect to the welfare of the public in general, and of
trade in particular, must then relate to the high-ways, canals, &c. in
which nothing ought to be neglected to render them safe and commo-
dious. France is one of those states where this duty to the public is dis-
charged with the greatest attention and magniﬁcence. Numerous pa-
troles every <44> where watch over the safety of travellers: magniﬁcent
roads, bridges, and canals, facilitate the communication between one
province and another:—Lewis XIV. joined the two seas by a work wor-
thy of the Romans.
The whole nation ought, doubtless, to contribute to such useful un-
dertakings. When therefore the laying out and repairing of high-ways,
bridges, and canals, would be too great a burthen on the ordinary rev-
enues of the state, the government may oblige the people to labour at
them, or to contribute to the expense. The peasants, in some of the
provinces of France, have been heard to murmur at the labours imposed
upon them for the construction of roads: but experience had no sooner
made them sensible of their true interest, than they blessed the authors
of the undertaking.
The construction and preservation of all these works being attended
with great expense, the nation may very justly oblige all those to con-
tribute to them, who receive advantage from their use: this is the legit-
imate origin of the right of toll. It is just, that a traveller, and especially
a merchant, who receives advantage from a bridge, a canal, or a road, in
his own passage, and in the more commodious conveyance of his mer-
chandise, should help to defray the expense of these useful establish-
ments, by a moderate contribution: and if the state thinks proper to
exempt the citizens from paying it, she is under no obligation to gratify
strangers in this particular.
But a law so just in its origin frequently degenerates into greatabuses.
There are countries where no care is taken of the high-ways, and where
§101. Duty of
government in
this respect.
§102. Its
rights in this
respect.
§103. Founda-
tion of the
right of toll.
§104. Abuse
of this right.

chapter x
141
nevertheless considerable tolls are exacted. A lord of a manor, who hap-
pens to possess a stripe of land terminating on a river, there establishes
a toll, though he is not at a farthing’s expense in keeping up the navi-
gation of the river, and rendering it convenient. This is a manifest ex-
tortion, and an infringment of the natural rights of mankind. For the
division of lands, and their becoming private property, could never de-
prive any man of the right of passage, when not the least injury is done
to the person through whose territory he passes. Every man inherits this
right from nature, and cannot justly be forced to purchase it.
But the arbitrary or customary law of nations at present tolerates this
abuse, while it is not carried to such an excess as to destroy commerce.
People do not, however, submit without difﬁculty, except in the case of
those tolls which are established by ancient usage: and the imposition
of new ones is often a source of disputes. The Swiss formerly made war
on the dukes of Milan, on account of some oppressions of this nature.
This right of tolls is also further abused, when the passenger is obliged
to contribute too much, and what bears no proportion to the expense
of preserving these public passages.
At present, to avoid all difﬁculty and oppression, nations settle these
points by treaties. <45>
chapter x
Of Money and Exchange.
In the ﬁrst ages after the introduction of private property, people ex-
changed their superﬂuous commodities and effects for those they
wanted. Afterwards gold and silver became the common standard of the
value of all things: and to prevent the people from being cheated, the
mode was introduced of stamping pieces of gold and silver in the name
of the state, with the ﬁgure of the prince, or some other impression, as
the seal and pledge of their value. This institution is of great use and
inﬁnite convenience: it is easy to see how much it facilitates com-
merce.—Nations or sovereigns cannot therefore bestow too much at-
tention on an affair of such importance.
§105. Estab-
lishment of
money.


142
book i: nations in themselves
The impression on the coin becoming the seal of its standard and
weight, a moment’sreﬂectionwillconvinceusthatthecoinageof money
ought not to be left indiscriminately free to every individual: for by that
means, frauds would become too common;—the coin would soon lose
the public conﬁdence; and this would destroy a most useful institution.
Hence money is coined by the authority and in the name of the state or
prince, who are its surety: they ought therefore to have a quantity of it
coined sufﬁcient to answer the necessities of the country, and to take
care that it be good, that is to say, that its intrinsic value bear a just pro-
portion to its extrinsic or numerary value.
It is true, that, in a pressing necessity, the state would have a right to
order the citizens to receive the coin at a price superior to its real value:
but as foreigners will not receive it at that price, the nation gainsnothing
by this proceeding: it is only a temporary palliative for the evil, without
effecting a radical cure. This excess of value, added in an arbitrary man-
ner to the coin, is a real debt which the sovereign contracts with indi-
viduals: and in strict justice, this crisis of affairs being over, that money
ought to be called in at the expense of the state, and paid for in other
specie, accordingtothe naturalstandard;otherwisethiskindof burthen,
laid on in the hour of necessity, would fall solely on those who received
this arbitrary money in payment: which would be unjust. Besides, ex-
perience has shewn that such a resource is destructive to trade, by de-
stroying the conﬁdence both of foreigners and citizens,—raising in pro-
portion the price of every thing,—and inducing every one to lock up or
send abroad the good old specie; whereby a temporary stop is put to the
circulation of money. So that it is the duty of every nation and of every
sovereign to abstain, as much as possible, from so dangerous an exper-
iment, and rather to have recourse <46> to extraordinary taxes and con-
tributions to support the pressing exigencies of the state.*
* In Boizard’s Treatise on Coin, we ﬁnd the following observations. “It is worthy
of remark, that, when our kings debased the coin, they kept the circumstance asecret
from the people:—witness the ordinance of Philip de Valois in 1350, by which he
ordered Tournois Doubles to be coined 2d. 5 1⁄3 gr. ﬁne, which was in fact a debase-
ment of the coin. In that ordinance, addressing the ofﬁcers of the mint, he says,
‘Upon the oath by which you are bound to the king, keep this affair as secret as you
§106. Duty
of the nation
or prince with
respect to
the coin.


chapter x
143
Since the state is surety for the goodness of the money and its cur-
rency, the public authority alone has the right of coining it. Those who
counterfeit it, violate the rights of the sovereign, whether they make it
of the same standard and value or not. These are called false-coiners,and
their crime is justly considered as one of the most heinous nature. For
if they coin base money, they rob both the public and the prince; and
if they coin good, they usurp the prerogative of the sovereign. They will
never be inclined to coin good money, unless there be a proﬁt on the
coinage: and in this case they rob the state of a proﬁt which exclusively
belongs to it. In both cases, they do an injury to the sovereign; for the
public faith being surety for the money, the sovereign alone has a right
possibly can, that neither the bankers nor others may by your means acquire any
knowledge of it: for if through you it comes to be known, you shall be punished for
the offence in such manner as shallserveasanexampletoothers.’”—Thesameauthor
quotes other similar ordinances of the same king, and one issued by the Dauphin
who governed the kingdom as regent during the captivity of king John, dated June
27, 1360, by virtue of which, the mint-masters directing the ofﬁcers engaged in the
coinage to coin white Deniers 1d. 12 gr. ﬁne, at the same time expressly command
them to keep this order secret, and, “if any persons should make inquiry respecting
their standard, to maintain that they were 2d. ﬁne.” Chap. xxix.
The kings [of France] had recourse to this strange expedient in cases of urgent
necessity: but they saw its injustice.—The same author, speaking of the debasement
of coin, or the various modes of reducing its intrinsic value,says—“Thoseexpedients
are but rarely resorted to, because they give occasion to the exportation or melting
down of the good specie, and to the introduction and circulation of foreign coin,—
raise the price of every thing,—impoverish individuals, diminish the revenue, which
is paid in specie of inferior value,—and sometimes put a totalstoptocommerce.This
truth has been so well understood in all ages, that those princes, who had recourse to
one or other of these modes of debasing the coin in difﬁcult times, ceased to practise
it the moment the necessity ceased to exist.” We have, on this subject, an ordinance
of Philip the Fair, issued in May, 1295, which announces, that, “The king having
reduced the coin both in ﬁneness and weight, and expecting to be obliged to make
a further reduction in order to retrieve his affairs,—but knowing himself to be, in
conscience, responsible for the injury caused to the state by such reduction,—pledges
himself to the people of his kingdom, by solemn charter, that, as soon as his affairs
are retrieved, he will restore the coin to its proper standard and value, at his own
private cost and expense, and will himself bear all the loss and waste. And,inaddition
to this engagement, Dame Joan, queen of France and Navarre [[r. 1285–1305]],
pledges her revenues and dower for the same purpose.” [[Note added in 1773/1797
editions.]]
§107. Their
rights in this
respect.


144
book i: nations in themselves
to have it coined. For this reason the right of coining is placed among
the prerogatives of majesty, and Bodinus relates,* that Sigismund Au-
gustus, king of Poland,31 having granted this privilege to the duke of
Prussia, in the year 1543, the states of the country passed a decree in
which it was asserted that the king could not grant that privilege,itbeing
inseparable from the crown. The same author observes, <47> that, al-
though many lords and bishops of France had formerly the privilege of
coining money, it was still considered as coined by the king’s authority:
and the kings of France at last withdrew all those privileges, on account
of their being often abused.
From the principles just laid down, it is easy to conclude, that if one
nation counterfeits the money of another, or if she allows and protects
false-coiners who presume to do it, she does that nation an injury. But
commonly criminals of this class ﬁnd no protection any-where,—all
princes being equally interested in exterminating them.
There is another custom more modern, and of no less use to com-
merce than the establishment of coin,—namely exchange, or the trafﬁc
of bankers, by means of which a merchant remits immense sums from
one end of the world to the other, at a very triﬂing expense, and, if he
pleases, without risk. For the same reason that sovereigns are obliged to
protectcommerce,theyareobligedtosupportthiscustom,bygoodlaws,
in which every merchant, whether citizen or foreigner, mayﬁndsecurity.
In general, it is equally the interest and the duty of every nation to have
wise and equitable commercial laws established in the country.
* In his [[Bodin’s]] Republic, Book I. Chap. X.
31. Sigismund Augustus, r. 1548–72.
§108. How
one nation
may injure
another in the
article of coin.
§109. Of ex-
change, and
the laws of
commerce.


chapter xi
145
chapter xi
Second Object of a good Government,—to procure
the true Happiness of the Nation.
Let us continue to lay open the principal objects of a good government.
What we have said in the ﬁve preceding chapters relates to the care of
providing for the necessities of the people, and procuring plenty in the
state: this is a point of necessity; but it is not sufﬁcient for the happiness
of a nation. Experience shews that a people may beunhappyinthemidst
of all earthly enjoyments, and in the possession of the greatest riches.
Whatever may enable mankind to enjoy a true and solid felicity, is a
second object that deserves the most serious attention of the govern-
ment. Happiness is the point where centre all those duties which indi-
viduals and nations owe to themselves; and this is the great end of the
law of nature. The desire of happiness is the powerful spring that puts
man in motion: felicity is the end they all have in view, and it ought to
be the grand object of the public will (Prelim. §5). It is then the duty of
those who form this public will, or of those who represent it—the rulers
of the nation—to labour for the happiness of the people, to watch con-
tinually over it, and to promote it to the utmost of their power.
To succeed in this, it is necessary to instruct the people to seek felicity
where it is to be found,—that is, in their own perfection,—and to teach
them the means of obtaining it. The <48> sovereign cannot then take
too much pains in instructing and enlightening his people, and in form-
ing them to useful knowledge and wise discipline. Let us leave a hatred
of the sciences to the despotic tyrants of the east: they are afraid of hav-
ing their people instructed, because they chuse to rule over slaves. But
though they are obeyed with the most abjectsubmission,theyfrequently
experience the effects of disobedience and revolt. A just and wise prince
feels no apprehensions from the light of knowledge: he knows that it is
ever advantageous to a good government. If men of learning know that
liberty is the natural inheritance of mankind, on the other hand they
are more fully sensible than their neighbours, how necessary it is, for
§110. A nation
ought to labour
after its own
happiness.
§111.
Instruction.


146
book i: nations in themselves
their own advantage, that this liberty should be subject to a lawful au-
thority:—incapable of being slaves, they are faithful subjects.
The ﬁrst impressions made on the mind are of theutmostimportance
for the remainder of life. In the tender years of infancy and youth, the
human mind and heart easily receive the seeds of good or evil. Hence
the education of youth is one of the most important affairs that deserve
the attention of the government. It ought not to be entirely left to fa-
thers. The most certain way of forming good citizens is to found good
establishments for public education, to provide them with able mas-
ters,—direct them with prudence,—and pursue such mild and suitable
measures, that the citizens will not neglect to take advantage of them.
How admirable was the education of the Romans, in the ﬂourishing
ages of their republic, and how admirably was it calculated to form great
men! The young men put themselves under the patronage of some il-
lustrious person; they frequented his house, accompanied him wherever
he went, and equally improved by his instructions and example: their
very sports and amusements were exercises proper to form soldiers. The
same practice prevailed at Sparta; and this was one of the wisest insti-
tutions of the incomparable Lycurgus. That legislator and philosopher
entered into the most minute details respecting the educationof youth,*
being persuaded that on that depended the prosperity and glory of his
republic.
Who can doubt that the sovereign,—the whole nation,—ought to
encourage the arts and sciences? To say nothing of the many useful in-
ventions that strike the eye of every beholder,—literature and the polite
arts enlighten the mind, and soften the manners: and if study does not
always inspire the love of virtue, it is because it sometimes, and even too
often, unhappily meets with an incorrigibly vicious heart. The nation
and its conductors ought then to protect men of learning and great art-
ists, and to call forth talents by honours and rewards. Let the friends of
barbarism declaim against the sciences and polite arts;—let us, without
deigning to answer their <49> vain reasonings, content ourselves with
appealing to experience. Let us compare England, France, Holland, and
* See Xenophon, Lacedaemon. Respublica.
§112. Educa-
tion of youth.
§113. Arts and
sciences.



chapter xi
147
several towns of Switzerland and Germany, to the many regions that lie
buried in ignorance, and see where we can ﬁnd the greater number of
honest men and good citizens. It would be a gross error toopposeagainst
us the example of Sparta, and that of ancient Rome. They, it is true,
neglected curious speculations, and those branches of knowledge and
art that were purely subservienttopleasureandamusement:butthesolid
and practical sciences,—morality, jurisprudence, politics, and war, were
cultivated by them, especially by the Romans, with a degree of attention
superior to what we bestow on them.
In the present age, the utility of literature and the polite arts is pretty
generally acknowledged, as is likewise the necessity of encouraging
them. The immortal Peter I. thought that without their assistance he
could not entirely civilise Russia, and render it ﬂourishing. In England,
learning and abilities lead to honour and riches. Newton was honoured,
protected, and rewarded while living, and after his death his tomb was
placed among those of kings. France also, in this respect, deserves par-
ticular praise: to the muniﬁcence of her kings she is indebted for several
establishments that are no less useful than glorious. The Royal Academy
of Sciences diffuses on every side the light of knowledge, and the desire
of instruction. Louis XV. furnished the means of sending to search, un-
der the equator and the polar circle, for the proof of an importanttruth;
and we at present know what was before only believed on the strength
of Newton’s calculations.Happywillthatkingdombe,if thetoogeneral
taste of the age does not make the people neglect solid knowledge, to
give themselves up to that which is merely amusing, and if those who
fear the light do not succeed in extinguishing the blaze of science!
I speak of the freedom of philosophical discussion, which is the soul
of the republic of letters. What can genius produce when trammelled
by fear? Can the greatest man that ever lived contribute much towards
enlightening the minds of his fellow-citizens, if he ﬁnds himself con-
stantly exposed to the cavils of captious and ignorant bigots,—if he is
obliged to be continually on his guard, to avoid being accused by
innuendo-mongers of indirectly attackingthereceivedopinions?Iknow
that liberty has its proper bounds,—that a wise government ought to
have an eye to the press, and not to allow the publication of scandalous
§114. Freedom
of philosoph-
ical discussion.


148
book i: nations in themselves
productions, which attack morality, government, or the established re-
ligion. But yet great care should be taken not to extinguish a light that
may afford the state the most valuable advantages. Few men know how
to keep a just medium; and the ofﬁce of literary censor ought to be in-
trusted to none but those who are at once both prudent andenlightened.
Why should they search in a book for what the author does not appear
to have intended to put into it? and when a writer’s thoughts and <50>
discourses are wholly employed on philosophy, ought a malicious ad-
versary to be listened to, who would set him at variance with religion?
So far from disturbing a philosopher on account of his opinions, the
magistrate oughtto chastisethosewhopubliclychargehimwithimpiety,
when in his writings he shews respect to the religion of the state. The
Romans seem to have been formed to give examples to the universe:that
wise people carefully supported the worship and religious ceremonies
established by law, and left the ﬁeld open to the speculations of philos-
ophers. Cicero—a senator, a consul, an augur—ridicules superstition,
attacks it, and demolishes it in his philosophical writings; and, in so do-
ing, he thought he was only promoting his own happiness and that of
his fellow-citizens: but he observes that “to destroy superstition is not
destroying religion; for (says he) it becomes a wise man to respect the
institutions and religious ceremonies of his ancestors: and it is sufﬁcient
to contemplate the beauty of the world, and the admirable order of the
celestial bodies, in order to be convinced of the existence of an eternal
and all-perfect being, who is entitled to the veneration of the human
race.”* And in his Dialogues on the Nature of the Gods, he introduces
* Nam, ut vere loquamur, superstitio fusa per gentes oppressit omnium fere an-
imos, atque omnium imbecillitatem occupavit. . . . multum enim & nobismet ipsis
& nostris profuturi videbamur, si eam funditus sustulissemus. Nec vero (id enim
diligenter intelligi volo) superstitione tollendaˆ religio tollitur. Nam & majorum in-
stituta tueri, sacris caeremoniisque retinendis, sapientis est: & esse praestantem ali-
quam aeternamque naturam, & eam suspiciendam, admirandamque hominum ge-
neri, pulchrit do mundi, ordoque coelestium cogit conﬁteri. [[“For, to speak truly,
that superstition has extended itself through all nations, and has oppressed the in-
tellectual energies of almost all men, and has betrayed into endless imbecilities. . . .
For I thought that I should be doing an immense beneﬁt both to myself and to my
countrymen if I could entirely eradicate all those superstitious errors. Nor is there


chapter xi
149
Cotta the academic, who was high-priest, attacking with great freedom
the opinions of the stoics, and declaring that he should always be ready
to defend the established religion from which he saw the republic had
derived great advantages; that neither the learned nor the ignorant
should make him abandon it: he then says to his adversary, “These are
my thoughts, both as pontiff and as Cotta. But do you, as a philosopher,
bring me over to your opinion by the strength of your arguments: for a
philosopher ought to prove to me the truth of the religion he would
have me embrace, whereas I ought in this respect to believe our forefa-
thers, even without proof.”*
Let us add experience to these examples and authorities. Never did a
philosopher occasiondisturbancesinthestate,orinreligion,byhisopin-
ions: they would make no noise among the people, nor ever offend the
weak, if malice or intemperate zeal did not take pains to discover a pre-
tended venom lurking in them. It is by him who endeavours to place
the opinions of a great man in opposition to the doctrines and worship
established <51> by law, that the state is disturbed, and religion brought
into danger.
any fear that true religion can be endangered by the demolition of superstition; for
it is a part of a wise man to uphold the religious institutions of our ancestors by the
maintenance of their rites and ceremonies. And the beauty of the worldandtheorder
of all celestial things compel us to confess that there is an excellent and eternalNature
which deserves to be worshipped and admired by all mankind.”]] De Divinatione,
Lib. II.
* Harum ego religionem nullamunquamcontemnendamputavi:mihiqueitaper-
suasi, Romulum auspiciis, Numam sacris constitutis, fundamenta jecisse nostraeciv-
itatis, quae nunquam profecto sine summa placatione Deorum immortalium tanta
esse potuisset. Habes, Balbe, quid Cotta, quid pontifex sentiat. Fac nunc ego intel-
ligam, quid tu sentias: a te enim philosopho rationem accipere debeo religionis; ma-
joribus autem nostris, etiam nulla ratione reddita, credere. [[“I have always thought
that none of these departments of religion was to be despised, and I have held the
conviction that Romulus by his auspices and Numa by his establishment of ourritual
laid the foundations of our state, which assuredly could never have been as great as
it is had not the fullest measure of divine favour been obtained for it. There, Balbus,
is the opinion of a Cotta and a pontiff; now oblige me by letting me know yours.
You are a philosopher, and I ought to receive from you a proof of your religion,
whereas I must believe the word of our ancestors even without proof.”]] De Natura
Deorum, Lib. III.

150
book i: nations in themselves
To instruct the nation, is not sufﬁcient:—in order to conduct it to
happiness, it is still more necessary to inspire the people with the love
of virtue, and the abhorrence of vice. Those who are deeply versed in
the study of morality are convinced that virtue is the true and only path
that leads to happiness; so that its maxims are but the art of living hap-
pily; and he must be very ignorant of politics, who does not perceive
how much more capable a virtuous nation will be, than any other, of
forming a state that shall be at once happy, tranquil, ﬂourishing, solid,
respected by its neighbours, and formidable to its enemies. The interest
of the prince must then concur with his duty and the dictates of his
conscience, in engaging him to watch attentively over an affair of such
importance. Let him employ all his authority in order to encourage vir-
tue, and suppress vice: let the public establishments be all directed to
this end: let his own conduct, his example, and the distribution of fa-
vours, posts, and dignities, all have the same tendency. Let him extend
his attention even to the private life of the citizens, and banish from the
state whatever is only calculated to corrupt the manners of the people.
It belongs to politics to teach him in detail the different means of at-
taining this desirable end,—to shew him those he should prefer, and
those he ought to avoid, on account of the dangers that might attend
the execution, and the abuses that might be made of them. We shallhere
only observe, in general, that vice may be suppressed by chastisements,
but that mild and gentle methods alone can elevate men to the dignity
of virtue: it may be inspired, but it cannot be commanded.
It is an incontestable truth, that the virtues of the citizens constitute
the most happy dispositions that can be desired by a just and wise gov-
ernment. Here then is an infallible criterion, by which the nation may
judge of the intentions of those who govern it. If they endeavour to
render the great and the common people virtuous, their views are pure
and upright; and you may rest assured that they solely aim at the great
end of government, the happiness and glory of the nation. But if they
corrupt the morals of the people, spread a taste for luxury, effeminacy,
a rage for licentious pleasures,—if they stimulate the higher orders to a
ruinous pomp and extravagance,—beware,citizens!bewareof thosecor-
§115. Love of
virtue, and
abhorrence of
vice to be
excited.
§116. The
nation may
hence discover
the intention
of its rulers.


chapter xi
151
ruptors! they only aim at purchasing slaves in order to exercise overthem
an arbitrary sway.
If a prince has the smallest share of moderation, he will never have
recourse to these odious methods. Satisﬁed with his superior stationand
the power given him by the laws, he proposes to reign with glory and
safety; he loves his people, and desires to render them happy. But his
ministers are in general impatient of resistance, and cannot brook the
slightest oppo-<52>sition:—if he surrenders to them his authority, they
are more haughty and intractable than their master: they feel not for his
people the same love that he feels: “let the nation be corrupted (say they)
provided it do but obey.” They dread the courage and ﬁrmness inspired
by virtue, and know that the distributor of favours rules as he pleases
over men whose hearts are accessible to avarice. Thus a wretch who ex-
ercises the most infamous of all professions, perverts the inclinations of
a young victim of her odious trafﬁc; she prompts her to luxury and ep-
icurism, she inspires her with voluptuousness and vanity, in order the
more certainly to betray her to a rich seducer. This base and unworthy
creature is sometimes chastised by the magistrate; but the minister, who
is inﬁnitely more guilty, wallows in wealth, and is invested with honour
and authority. Posterity, however, will do him justice, and detest thecor-
ruptor of a respectable nation.
If governors endeavoured to fulﬁll the obligations which the law of
nature lays upon them with respect to themselves, and in their character
of conductors of the state, they would be incapable of ever giving into
the odious abuse just mentioned. Hitherto we have considered the ob-
ligation a nation is under to acquire knowledge and virtue, or to perfect
its understanding and will;—that obligation, I say, we have considered
in relation to the individuals that compose a nation: it also belongs in a
proper and singular manner to the conductors of the state. A nation,
while she acts in common, or in a body, is a moral person (Prelim. §2)
that has an understanding and will of her own, and is not less obliged
than any individual to obey the laws of nature (Book I. §5), and to im-
prove her faculties (Book I. §21). That moral person resides in thosewho
are invested with the public authority, and represent the entire nation.
§117. The
state, or the
public person,
ought to per-
fect its under-
standing and
will.


152
book i: nations in themselves
Whether this be the common council of the nation, anaristocraticbody,
or a monarch, this conductor and representative of the nation, this sov-
ereign, of whatever kind, is therefore indispensably obliged to procure
all the knowledge and information necessary to govern well, and to ac-
quire the practice and habit of all the virtues suitable to a sovereign.
And as this obligation is imposed with a view to the public welfare,
he ought to direct all his knowledge, and all his virtues, to the safety of
the state, the end of civil society.
He ought even to direct, as much as possible, all the abilities, the
knowledge, and the virtues of the citizens to this great end; so that they
may not only be useful to the individuals who possess them, but also to
the state. This is one of the great secrets in the art of reigning. The state
will be powerful and happy, if the good qualities of the subject, passing
beyond the narrow sphere of private virtues, become civic virtues. This
happy disposition raised the Roman republic to the highest pitch of
power and glory.
The grand secret of giving to the virtues of individuals a <53> turn
so advantageous to the state, is to inspire the citizens with an ardent love
for their country. It will then naturally follow, that each will endeavour
to serve the state, and to apply all his powers and abilities to the advan-
tage and glory of the nation. This love of their country is natural to all
men. The good and wise author of nature has taken care to bind them,
by a kind of instinct, to the places where they received their ﬁrst breath,
and they love their own nation, as a thing with which they areintimately
connected. But it often happens that some causes unhappily weaken or
destroy this natural impression. The injustice or the severity of the gov-
ernment too easily effaces it from the hearts of the subjects: can self-love
attach an individual to the affairs of a country where every thing is done
with a view to a single person?—far from it:—we see, on the contrary,
that free nations are passionately interested in the glory and the happi-
ness of their country. Let us call to mind the citizens of Rome in the
happy days of the republic, and consider, in modern times, the English
and the Swiss.
The love and affection a man feels for the state of which he is a mem-
ber, is a necessary consequence of the wise and rational love he owes to
§118. And
to direct the
knowledge and
virtues of the
citizens to the
welfare of the
society.
§119. Love for
their country.
§120. In
individuals.


chapter xi
153
himself, since his own happiness is connected with that of his country.
This sensation ought also to ﬂow from the engagements he has entered
into with society. He has promised to procure its safety and advantage
as far as in his power: and how can he serve it with zeal, ﬁdelity, or cour-
age, if he has not a real love for it?
The nation in a body ought doubtless to love itself, and desire its own
happiness as a nation. The sensation is toonaturaltoadmitof anyfailure
in this obligation: but this duty relates more particularly to the conduc-
tor, the sovereign, who represents the nation, and acts in its name. He
ought to love it as what is most dear to him, to prefer it to every thing,
for it is the only lawful object of his care, and of his actions, in every
thing he does by virtue of the public authority. The monster who does
not love his people is no better than an odious usurper, and deserves, no
doubt, to be hurled from the throne. There is no kingdom where the
statue of Codrus32 ought not to be placed before the palace of the sov-
ereign. That magnanimous king of Athens sacriﬁced his life for his peo-
ple.* That great prince, and Louis XII.33 are illustrious models of the
tender love a sovereign owes to his subjects.
The term, country, seems to be pretty generally known: but as it is
taken in different senses, it may not be unuseful to give it here an exact
deﬁnition. It commonly signiﬁes the state of which one is a member: in
this sense we have used it in the <54> preceding sections; and it to be
thus understood in the law of nations.
In a more conﬁned sense, and more agreeably to its etymology, this
term signiﬁes the state, or even more particularly the town or place,
where our parents had their ﬁxed residence at the moment of our birth.
In this sense, it is justly said, that our country cannot be changed, and
always remains the same, to whatsoever placewemayafterwardsremove.
A man ought to preserve gratitude and affection for the state to which
* His country being attacked by the Heraclidae, he consulted theoracleof Apollo;
and being answered, that the people whose chief should be slain, should remain vic-
torious, Codrus disguised himself, and, rushing into the battle, was killed by one of
the enemy’s soldiers. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
32. Codrus, king of Athens, r. ca. 1089–1068 b.c.
33. Louis XII, r. 1498–1515.
§121. In the
nation or state
itself, and in
the sovereign.
§122. Deﬁni-
tion of the
term country.


154
book i: nations in themselves
he is indebted for his education, and of which his parents weremembers
when they gave him birth. But as various lawful reasons may oblige him
to chuse another country,—that is, to become a member of another so-
ciety; so, when we speak in general of the duty to our country, the term
is to be understood as meaning the state of which a man is an actual
member; since it is the latter, in preference to every other state, that he
is bound to serve with his utmost efforts.
If every man is obliged to entertain a sincere love for his country, and
to promote its welfare as far as in hispower,itisashamefulanddetestable
crime to injure that very country. He who becomes guilty of it, violates
his most sacred engagements, and sinks into base ingratitude: he dis-
honours himself by the blackest perﬁdy, since he abuses the conﬁdence
of his fellow-citizens, and treats as enemies those who had a right to
expect his assistance and services. We see traitors to their country only
among those men who are solely sensible to base interest, who only seek
their own immediate advantage, and whose hearts are incapable of every
sentiment of affection for others. They are therefore justly detested by
mankind in general, as the most infamous of all villains.
On the contrary, those generous citizens are loaded with honour and
praise, who, not content with barely avoiding a failure in duty to their
country, make noble efforts in her favour, and are capable of makingher
the greatest sacriﬁces. The names of Brutus,34 Curtius,35 and the two
Decii,36 will live as long as that of Rome. The Swiss will never forget
Arnold de Winkelried,37 that hero, whose exploit would have deserved
to be transmitted to posterity by the pen of a Livy. He truly devoted his
life for his country’s sake: but he devoted it as a general, as an undaunted
34. Marcus Junius Brutus Caepio, governor of Gaul and praetor, most famous for
his role in the murder of Julius Caesar in 44 b.c.
35. Marcus Curtius, legendary hero of ancient Rome, who (Livy, History of Rome,
I.6.1–6) managed to close a chasm that had opened in the Forum by leaping, fully
armed and on horseback, into it.
36. The two Decii, father and son, sacriﬁced themselves to the gods for the deliv-
erance and safe keeping of the Roman army.
37. At Sempach, Winkelried sacriﬁced himself to save the Swiss Confederation
by creating a passage through the rows of enemy lances with his body.
§123. How
shameful and
criminal to
injure our
country.
§124. The
glory of good
citizens.
Examples.


chapter xii
155
warrior, not as a superstitious visionary. That nobleman, who was of the
country of Underwald, seeing at the battle of Sempach38 that his coun-
trymen could not break through the Austrians, because the latter, armed
cap-a-pie, had dismounted, and, forming a close battalion, presented a
front covered with steel, and bristling with pikes and lances,—formed
the generous design of sacriﬁcing himself for his country. “My friends,”
said he to the Swiss, who began to be dispirited, “I will this day give my
life to procure you the victory: I only recommend to you my family:
follow me, and act in consequence of what <55> you see me do.” At
these words he ranged them in that form which the Romans called cu-
neus, and placing himself in the point of the triangle, marched to the
centre of the enemy; when, embracing between his arms as many of the
enemy’s pikes as he could compass, he threw himself to the ground,thus
opening for his followers a passage to penetrate into the midst of this
thick battalion. The Austrians, once broken, were conquered, as the
weight of their armour then became fatal to them, and the Swiss ob-
tained a complete victory.*
chapter xii
Of Piety and Religion.
Piety and religion have an essential inﬂuence on the happiness of a na-
tion, and, from their importance, deserve a particular chapter. Nothing
is so proper as piety to strengthen virtue, and give it its due extent. By
the word piety, I mean a disposition of soul that leads us to direct all our
* This affair happened in the year 1386. The Austrian army consistedof fourthou-
sand chosen men, among whom were a great number of princes, counts, and no-
bility of distinguished rank, all armed from head to foot. The Swiss were no more
than thirteen hundred men, ill armed. In this battle, the duke of Austria perished
with two thousand of his forces, in which number were six hundred and seventy-
six noblemen of the best families in Germany. History of the Helvetic Confederacy, by
de Watteville, Vol. I. p. 183.—Tschudi.—Etterlin.—Schodeler.—Raebman
[[Rebmann]].
38. Battle of Sempach, 1386.
§125. Of
piety.

156
Three Essays by Vattel
The ﬁrst two essays included here, Essay on the Foundation of Natural
Law 1 and Can Natural Law Bring Society to Perfection Without the As-
sistance of Political Laws? 2 date from the early and formative phase of
Vattel’s career and anticipate many of the themes of The Law of Nations.
Both essays were originally published in the collectionLeloisirphilosoph-
ique ou pie`ces diverses de philosophie, de morale et d’amusement (Geneva,
1747). The second dissertation was a response to the Academyof Dijon’s
prize competition of 1742.
The two translations, both for the ﬁrst time in English, are based on
the texts as appended to a nineteenth-century edition of the Le droit des
gens: Nouvelle e´dition, pre´ce´de´ d’un essai et d’une dissertation (de l’auteur),
accompagne´e des notes de Pinheiro-Ferreira et du Baron de Chambrier
d’Oleires, augmente du discours sur l’e´tude du droit de la nature et des gens
par Sir J. Mackintosh (traduction nouvelle), comple`te´ par l’exposition des
doctrines des publicistes contemporains mise au courant des progre`s du droit
public moderne et suivie d’une table analytique des matie`res, par M. P.
Pradier-Fode´re´ (3 vols.; Paris: Saint-Denis, 1863).
The third essay, Dialogue Between the Prince of **** and His Conﬁ-
dant, 3 was ﬁrst published in Amusemens de litte´rature, de morale, et de
politique par M. de Vattel (The Hague: Pierre Gosse Junior & Daniel
Pinet libraires de S.A.S, 1765, 21–48). It is translated here in English for
the ﬁrst time.
The text of this essay is important because it shows Vattel to have
1. Emer de Vattel, Essay on the Foundation of NaturalLawandontheFirstPrinciple
of the Obligation Men Find Themselves Under to Observe Laws (Essai sur le fondement
du droit naturel, et sur le premier principe de l’obligation ou` se trouvent tous les hommes,
d’en observer les lois), translated by T. J. Hochstrasser.
2. Dissertation on This Question: “Can Natural Law Bring Society to Perfection
Without the Assistance of Political Laws?” (Dissertation sur cette question: “Si la loi na-
turelle peut porter la socie´te´ a` sa perfection, sans le secours des loix politiques?”),translated
by T. J. Hochstrasser.
3. Emer de Vattel, Dialogue Between the Prince of **** & his Conﬁdant, on certain
Essential Elements of Public Administration (Dialogue entre le prince de **** & son
conﬁdent, sur quelques parties essentielles de l’administration publique), translated by
K. Goodwin.


xxiv
a note on the texts
been participating fully in the debates about economic and administra-
tive reform that took place all over Europe at the time. The Dialogue
also shows that Vattel’s theory of international law (and especially his
assessment of Europe’s chances of having a workable system of inter-
national justice) can be fully understood only when seen in the light of
his ideas about domestic reform.
In all three essays the original notes have been preserved as numbered
notes. New material added by the volume editors is enclosed in double
square brackets.

acknowledgments
The editors would like to thank Nikolas Funke, Ken Goodwin, Tim
Hochstrasser, Amanda McKeever, Norman Vance, and Stefania Tutino
for extensive scholarly labors which have immeasurably improved this
edition. Ian Gazeley, Julian Hoppit, Istvan Hont, Michael Sonenscher,
Gabriella Silvestrini, and Brian Young deserve thanksforhelponspeciﬁc
points of fact. Thanks are also due to Laura Goetz, Diana Francoeur,
and the editorial team at Liberty Fund, who saw the manuscriptthrough
press with outstanding professionalism. Support for the research under-
pinning this edition was provided by the School of Humanities Re-
search Fund at the University of Sussex, the British Academy, the Arts
and Humanities Research Council, the Leverhulme Trust, the Institut
d’Etudes Politiques et Internationales de l’universite´ de Lausanne, and
the Swiss National Science Foundation. As is always the case, a debt of
gratitude is owed to our wives and families, and also to our colleagues
in intellectual history at Sussex, Fribourg, and Lausanne. Our greatest
debt, however, is to Knud Haakonssen who, master editor that he is,
guided us with patience and good humor throughthe mineﬁeldof mod-
ern editorial practice.
Be´la Kapossy
Richard Whatmore
book i: nations in themselves
actions towards the Deity, and to endeavour to please him in every thing
we do. To the practice of this virtue all mankind are indispensably
obliged: it is the purest source of their felicity; and those who unite in
civil society, are under still greater obligations to practise it. A nation
ought then to be pious. The superiors intrusted with the public affairs
should constantly endeavour to deserve the approbation of their divine
master; and whatever they do in the name of the state, ought to be reg-
ulated by this grand view. The care of forming pious dispositions in all
the people should be constantly one of the principal objects of their
vigilance, and from this the state will derive very great advantages. A
serious attention to merit in all our actions the approbation of an inﬁ-
nitely wise Being, cannot fail of producing excellent citizens. Enlight-
ened piety in the people is the ﬁrmest support of a lawful authority;and,
in the sovereign’s heart, it is the pledge of the people’s safety, and excites
their conﬁdence. Ye lords of the earth, who acknowledge no superior
here below, what security can we have for the purity of your intentions,
if we do not conceive you to be deeply impressed with respect for the
common Father and Lord of men, and animated with a desire to please
him?
We have already insinuated that piety ought to be attended with
knowledge. In vain would we propose to please God, if <56> we know
not the means of doing it. But what a deluge of evils arises when men
heated by so powerful a motive are prompted to take methods that are
equally false and pernicious! A blind piety only produces superstitious
bigots, fanatics and persecutors, a thousand times more dangerous and
destructive to society than libertines are. There have appearedbarbarous
tyrants who have talked of nothing but the glory of God, while they
crushed the people, and trampled under foot the most sacred laws of
nature. It was from a reﬁnement of piety, that the anabaptists of the
sixteenth century refused all obedience to the powers of the earth.James
Clement and Ravaillac,* those execrable parricides, thought themselves
animated by the most sublime devotion.
* The former assassinated Henry III. of France [[r. 1574–89]]; the lattermurdered
his successor, Henry IV [[r. 1594–1610]].
§126. It ought
to be at-
tended with
knowledge.


chapter xii
157
Religion consists in the doctrines concerning the Deityandthethings
of another life, and in the worship appointed to the honour of the su-
preme Being. So far as it is seated in the heart, it is an affairof conscience,
in which every one ought to be directed by his own understanding: but
so far as it is external, and publicly established, it is an affair of state.
Every man is obliged to endeavour to obtain just ideas of God, to
know his laws, his views with respect to his creatures, and the end for
which they were created. Man, doubtless, owes the most pure love, the
most profound respect to his Creator; and to keep alive these disposi-
tions, and act in consequence of them, he should honour God in all his
actions, and shew, by the most suitable means, the sentiments that ﬁll
his mind. This short explanation is sufﬁcient to prove that man is es-
sentially and necessarily free to make use of his own choice in matters
of religion. His belief is not to be commanded; and what kind of wor-
ship must that be, which is produced by force! Worship consists in cer-
tain actions performed with an immediate view to the honour of God;
there can then be no worship proper for any man, which he does not
believe suitable to that end. The obligation of sincerely endeavouringto
know God, of serving him, and adoring him from the bottom of the
heart, being imposed on man by his very nature,—it is impossible that,
by his engagements with society, he should have exonerated himself
from that duty, or deprived himself of the liberty which is absolutely
necessary for the performance of it. It must then be concluded, that
liberty of conscience is a natural and inviolable right. It is a disgrace to
human nature, that a truth of this kind should stand in need of proof.
But we should take care not to extend this liberty beyond its just
bounds. In religious affairs a citizen has only a right to be free from com-
pulsion, but can by no means claim that of openlydoingwhathepleases,
without regard to the consequences it may produce on society. The es-
tablishment of re-<57>ligion by law, and its public exercise, are matters
of state, and are necessarily under the jurisdiction of the political au-
thority. If all men are bound to serve God, the entire nation, in her
national capacity, is doubtless obliged to serve and honour him (Prelim.
§5). And as this important duty is to be discharged by the nationinwhat-
ever mannershejudgesbest,—tothenationitbelongstodeterminewhat
§127. Of reli-
gion internal
and external.
§128. Rights
of individuals.
Liberty of
conscience.
§129. Public
establishment
of religion.
Duties and
rights of the
nation.


158
book i: nations in themselves
religion she will follow, and what public worship she thinks proper to
establish.
If there be as yet no religion established by public authority, the na-
tion ought to use the utmost care, in order to know and establish the
best. That which shall have the approbation of the majority shall be
received, and publicly established by law; by which means it willbecome
the religion of the state. But if a considerable part of the nation is ob-
stinately bent upon following another, it is asked—What does the law
of nations require in such a case? Let us ﬁrst remember that liberty of
conscience is a natural right, and that there must be no constraint in this
respect. There remain then but two methods to take,—either to permit
this party of the citizens to exercise the religion they chuse to profess,—
or to separate them from the society,—leaving them their property, and
their share of the country that belonged to the nation in common,—
and thus to form two new states instead of one. The latter method ap-
pears by no means proper:—itwouldweakenthenation,andthuswould
be inconsistent with that regard which she owes to her ownpreservation.
It is therefore of more advantage to adopt the former method, and thus
to establish two religions in the state. But if these religions are too in-
compatible,—if there be reason to fear that they will produce divisions
among the citizens, and disorder in public affairs,—there is a third
method, a wise medium between the two former, of which the Swiss
have furnished examples. The cantons of Glaris and Appenzel were, in
the sixteenth century, each divided into two parts: the one preserved the
Romish religion, and the other embraced the reformation: each part has
a distinct government of its own for domestic affairs; but on foreign
affairs they unite, and form but one and the same republic, one and the
same canton.
Finally, if the number of citizens who would profess a different re-
ligion from that established by the nation be inconsiderable,—andif for
good and just reasons it be thought improper to allow the exercise of
several religions in the state,—those citizens have a right to sell their
lands, to retire with their families, and take all their property with them.
For their engagements to society, and their submission to the public au-
thority, can never oblige them to violate their consciences. If the society
§130. When
there is as yet
no established
religion.


chapter xii
159
will not allow me to do that to which I think myself bound by an in-
dispensable obligation, it is obliged to allow me permission to depart.
When the choice of a religion is already made, and there is one es-
tablished by law, the nation ought to protect and support <58> that re-
ligion, and preserve it as an establishment of the greatest importance,—
without, however, blindly rejecting the changes that may be proposed
to render it more pure and useful: for we ought, in all things, to aim at
perfection (§21). But as all innovations, in this case, are full of danger,
and can seldom be produced without disturbances, they ought not to be
attempted upon slight grounds, without necessity, or very important
reasons. It solely belongs to the society, the state, the entire nation, to
determine the necessity or propriety of those changes; and no private
individual has a right to attempt them by his own authority, nor con-
sequently to preach to the people a new doctrine. Let him offer his sen-
timents to the conductors of the nation, and submit to the orders he
receives from them.
But if a new religion spreads, and becomes ﬁxed in the minds of the
people, as it commonly happens, independently of the public authority,
and without any deliberation in common,—it will be then necessary to
adopt the mode of reasoning we followed in the preceding section on
the case of chusing a religion,—to pay attention to the number of those
who follow the new opinions,—to remember that no earthly power has
authority over the consciences of men,—and to unite the maxims of
sound policy with those of justice and equity.
We have thus given a brief compendium of the duties and rights of
a nation with regard to religion. Let us now come to those of the sov-
ereign. These cannot be exactly the same as those of the nation which
the sovereign represents. The nature of the subject opposes it; for in
religion nobody can give up his liberty. To give a clear and distinct view
of those rights and duties of the prince, and to establish them on a solid
basis, it is necessary here to refer to the distinction we have made in the
two preceding sections:—if there is question of establishing a religion
in a state that has not yet received one, the sovereign may doubtless fa-
vour that which to him appears the true or the best religion,—may have
it announced to the people, and, by mild and suitable means, endeavour
§131. When
there is an
established
religion.
§132. Duties
and rights of
the sovereign
with regard
to religion.


160
book i: nations in themselves
to establish it:—he is even bound to do this, because he is obliged to
attend to every thing that concerns the happiness of the nation. But in
this he has no right to use authority and constraint. Since there was no
religion established in the society when he received his authority, the
people gave him no power in this respect; the supportof thelawsrelating
to religion is no part of his ofﬁce, and does not belong to the authority
with which they intrusted him. Numa was the founder of the religion
of the ancient Romans: but he persuaded the people to receive it. If he
had been able to command in that instance, he would not have had
recourse to the revelations of the nymph Egeria.39 Though the sovereign
cannot exert any authority in order to establish a religion where there is
none, he is authorised and even obliged toemploy allhispowertohinder
the introduction of one which he judges pernicioustomoralityanddan-
gerous to the state. For he ought <59> to preserve his people from every
thing that may be injurious to them; and so far is a new doctrine from
being an exception to this rule, that it is one of its most important ob-
jects. We shall see, in the following sections, what are the duties and
rights of the prince in regard to the religion publicly established.
The prince, or the conductor, to whom the nation has intrusted the
care of the government, and the exercise of the sovereign power, is
obliged to watch over the preservation of the received religion, the wor-
ship established by law,—and has a right to restrain those who attempt
to destroy or disturb it. But to acquit himself of this duty in a manner
equally just and wise, he ought never to lose sight of the character in
which he is called to act, and the reason of his being invested with it.
Religion is of extreme importance to the peace and welfare of society;
and the prince is obliged to have an eye to every thing in which the state
is interested. This is all that calls him to interfere in religion,ortoprotect
and defend it. It is therefore upon this footing only that he can interfere:
consequently he ought to exert his authority against those alone whose
conduct in religious matters is prejudicial or dangerous to the state; but
39. In Roman myth the water nymph was consulted by Numa concerning the
establishment of the Roman calendar in a series of nocturnalinterviews(Livy,History
of Rome, I.19).
§133. Where
there is an
established
religion.


chapter xii
161
he must not extend it to pretended crimes against God, the punishment
of which exclusively belongs to the Sovereign Judge, the Searcher of
hearts. Let us remember that religion is no farther an affair of state, than
as itisexteriorandpubliclyestablished:thatof theheartcanonlydepend
on the conscience. The prince has no right to punish any persons but
those that disturb society; and it would be very unjust in him to inﬂict
pains and penalties on any person whatsoever for his private opinions,
when that person neither takes pains to divulge them, nor to obtain fol-
lowers. It is a principle of fanaticism, a source of evils, and of the most
notorious injustice, to imagine that frail mortals ought to take up the
cause of God, maintain his glory by acts of violence, and avenge him
on his enemies. Let us only give to sovereigns, said a great statesman and
an excellent citizen*—let us give them, for the common advantage, the
power of punishing whatever is injurious to charity in society. It appertains
not to human justice to become the avenger of what concerns the cause of
God.† Cicero, who was as ableand as greatinstateaffairsasinphilosophy
and eloquence, thought like the duke of Sully. In the laws he proposes
relating to religion, he says, on the subject of piety and interior religion,
“if any one transgresses, God will revenge it”: but he declares the crime
capital that should be committed against the religious ceremoniesestab-
lished for public affairs, and in which the whole state is concerned.‡The
wise Romans <60> were very far from persecuting a man for his creed;
they only required that people should not disturb the public order.
The creeds or opinions of individuals, their sentiments with respect
to the Deity,—in a word, interior religion—should, like piety, be the
object of the prince’s attention: he should neglect no means of enabling
his subjects to discover the truth, and of inspiring them with good sen-
timents; but he should employ for this purpose only mild and paternal
* The duke de Sully; see his Memoirs digested by M. de l’Ecluse, Vol. V. p. 135,
136.
† Deorum injuriae diis curae. Tacit. Ann. book I. c. 73. [[“The gods must look to
their own wrongs” (trans. Eds.). Tacitus, Annales I, chap. 23, p. 369.]]
‡ Qui secus faxit, Deus ipse vindex erit. . . . Qui non paruerit, capitale esto.[[“He
who acts otherwise will have God for his avenger. . . . If a person disobeys, it will be
a capital offense.” (trans. Eds.)]] De Legib. Lib. II.
§134. Objects
of his care,
and the means
he ought to
employ.

162
book i: nations in themselves
methods.* Here he cannot command (§128). It is in externalreligionand
its public exercise that his authority may be employed. His task is to
preserve it, and to prevent the disorders and troubles it may occasion.
To preserve religion, he ought to maintain it in the purity of its insti-
tution, to take care that it be faithfully observed in all its public acts and
ceremonies, and punish those who dare to attack it openly. But he can
require nothing by force except silence, and ought never to oblige any
person to bear a part in external ceremonies:—by constraint, he would
only produce disturbances or hypocrisy.
A diversity of opinions and worship has often produceddisordersand
fatal dissensions in a state: and for this reason, many will allow but one
and the same religion. A prudent and equitable sovereign will, in par-
ticular conjunctures, see whether it be proper to tolerate or forbid the
exercise of several different kinds of worship.
But, in general, we may boldly afﬁrm that the most certain and eq-
uitable means of preventing the disorders that may be occasioned by
difference of religion, is an universal toleration of all religions which
contain no tenets that are dangerous either to morality or to the state.
Let interested priests declaim!—they would not trample under foot the
laws of humanity, and those of God himself, to make their doctrine
triumph, if it were not the foundation on which are erected their opu-
lence, luxury, and power. Do but crush the spirit of persecution,—pun-
ish severely whoever shall dare to disturb others on account of their
creed,—and you will see all sects living in peace in their common coun-
try, and ambitious of producing good citizens. Holland and the states
of the king of Prussia furnish a proof of this: Calvinists, Lutherans,
Catholics, Pietists, Socinians, Jews, all live there in peace, because they
are equally protected by the sovereign; and none are punished, but the
disturbers of the tranquillity of others.
* Quas (religiones) non metu, sed ea conjunctione quae est homini cum deo, con-
servandas puto. [[“Which, I believe, need to be preserved not out of fear but because
of the bond which exists between human and god.”]] Cicero de Legib. Lib. I. What
a ﬁne lesson does this pagan philosopher give to Christians!
§135. Of
toleration.


chapter xii
163
If, in spite of the prince’s care to preserve the established religion,the
entire nation, or the greater part of it, should be disgusted with it, and
desire to have it changed, the sovereign cannot do violence to his people,
nor constrain them in an affair of this nature. The public religion was
established for the safety <61> and advantage of the nation: and, besides
its proving inefﬁcacious when it ceases to inﬂuence the heart, the sov-
ereign has here no other authority than that which results from the trust
reposed in him by the people,—and they have only committed to him
that of protecting whatever religion they think proper to profess.
But at the same time it is very just that the prince should have the
liberty of continuing in the profession of his own religion, without los-
ing his crown. Provided that he protect the religion of the state, this is
all that can be required of him. In general, a difference of religion can
never make any prince forfeit his claims to the sovereignty, unless a fun-
damental law ordain it otherwise. The pagan Romans did not cease to
obey Constantine,40 when he embraced Christianity; nor did the Chris-
tians revolt from Julian,41 after he had quitted it.*
We have established liberty of conscience for individuals (§128).
However, we have also shewn that the sovereign has a right, and is even
under an obligation, to protect and support the religion of the state,and
not suffer any person to attempt to corrupt or destroy it,—that he may
even, according to circumstances, permit only one kind of public wor-
ship throughout the whole country. Let us reconcile those different du-
ties and rights, between which it may be thought that there is some con-
tradiction:—let us, if possible, omit no material argument on so
important and delicate a subject.
If the sovereign will allow the public exercise of only one and the
* When the chief part of the people in the principality of Neufchatel and Val-
langin embraced the reformed religion in the sixteenth century, Joan of Hochberg,
their sovereign, continued to live in the Roman Catholic faith, and nevertheless still
retained all her rights. The state council enacted ecclesiastical laws and constitutions
similar to those of the reformed churches in Switzerland; and the princess gave them
her sanction. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
40. Constantine I, Roman emperor, r. a.d. 306–37.
41. Julian, Roman emperor, r. a.d. 361–63.
§136. What
the prince
ought to do
when the
nation is
resolved to
change its
religion.
§137. Differ-
ence of reli-
gion does not
deprive a
prince of his
crown.
§138. Duties
and rights of
the sovereign
reconciled
with those of
the subjects.


164
book i: nations in themselves
same religion, let him oblige no body to do any thing contrary to his
conscience; let no subject be forced to bear a part in a worship which he
disapproves, or to profess a religion which he believes to be false; but let
the subject on his part rest content with avoiding the guilt of a shameful
hypocrisy; let him, according to the light of his own knowledge, serve
God in private, and in his own house,—persuaded that providencedoes
not call upon him for public worship, since it has placed him in such
circumstances, that he cannot perform it without creating disturbances
in the state. God would have us obey our sovereign, and avoid every
thing that may be pernicious to society. These are immutable precepts
of the law of nature: the precept that enjoins public worship is condi-
tional, and dependent on the effects which that worship may produce.
Interior worship is necessary in its own nature; and we ought to conﬁne
ourselves to it, in all cases in which it is most convenient. Publicworship
is appointed for the ediﬁcation of men in glorifying God: but it coun-
teracts that end, and ceases to be laudable, on those occasions when it
only produces disturbances, and gives offence. <62> If any one believes
it absolutely necessary, let him quit the country where he is not allowed
to perform it according to the dictates of his own conscience,—let him
go and join those who profess the same religion with himself.
The prodigious inﬂuence of religion on the peace and welfare of so-
ciety incontrovertibly proves that the conductor of the state ought to
have the inspection of what relates to it, and an authority over the min-
isters who teach it. The end of society and of civil government neces-
sarily requires that he who exercises the supreme power should be in-
vested with all the rights without which he could not exercise it in a
manner the most advantageous to the state. These are the prerogatives
of majesty (§45), of which no sovereign can divest himself, without the
express consent of the nation. The inspection of the affairs of religion,
and the authority over its ministers, constitute therefore one of themost
important of those prerogatives, since, without thispower,thesovereign
would never be able to prevent the disturbances that religion might oc-
casion in the state, nor to employ that powerful engine in promotingthe
welfare and safety of the society. It would be certainly very strange that
a multitude of men who united themselves in society for their common
§139. The
sovereign
ought to have
the inspection
of the affairs
of religion,
and authority
over those who
teach it.


chapter xii
165
advantage, that each might in tranquillity labour to supply his necessi-
ties, promote his own perfection and happiness, and live as becomes a
rational being,—itwould beverystrange,Isay,thatsuchasocietyshould
not have a right to follow their own judgment in an affair of the utmost
importance,—to determine what they think most suitable with regard
to religion,—and to take care that nothing dangerous or hurtful be
mixed with it. Who shall dare to dispute that an independent nation
has, in this respect as in all others, a right to proceed according to the
light of conscience? and when once she has made choice of a particular
religion and worship, may she not confer on her conductor all thepower
she possesses of regulating and directing that religion and worship, and
enforcing their observance?
Let us not be told that the management of sacred things belongs not
to a profane hand. Such discourses, when brought to the bar of reason,
are found to be only vain declamations. There is nothing on earth more
august and sacred than a sovereign; and why should God, who calls him
by his providence to watch over the safety and happiness of a whole
nation, deprive him of the direction of the most powerful spring that
actuates mankind? The law of nature secures to him this right, with all
others that are essential to good government; and nothing is to be found
in Scripture that changes this disposition. Among the Jews, neither the
king nor any other person could make any innovation in the law of
Moses; but the sovereign attended to its preservation, and could check
the high-priest when he deviated from his duty. Where is it asserted in
the New Testament, that a Christian prince has nothing to do with re-
ligious affairs? Submission and obedience to the superior powers are
<63> there clearly and expressly enjoined. It were in vain to object to us
the example of the apostles, who preached the gospel in opposition to
the will of sovereigns:—whoever would deviate from the ordinary rules,
must have a divine mission, and establish his authority by miracles.
No person can dispute that the sovereign has a right to take care that
nothing contrary to the welfare and safety of the state beintroducedinto
religion; and consequently he must have a right to examine its doctrines,
and to point out what is to be taught, and what is to be suppressed in
silence.


166
book i: nations in themselves
The sovereign ought likewise to watch attentively, in order to prevent
the established religion from being employed to sinister purposes, either
by making use of its discipline to gratify hatred, avarice, or other pas-
sions, or presenting its doctrines in a light that may prove prejudicial to
the state. Of wild reveries, seraphic devotions,andsublimespeculations,
what would be the consequences to society, if it entirely consisted of
individuals whose intellects wereweak, and whoseheartswereeasilygov-
erned?—the consequences would be a renunciation of the world, a gen-
eral neglect of business and of honest labour. This society of pretended
saints would become an easy and certain prey to the ﬁrst ambitious
neighbour; or if suffered to live in peace, it would not survive the ﬁrst
generation; both sexes, consecrating their chastity to God, would refuse
to co-operate in the designs of their creator, and to comply with the
requisitions of nature and of the state. Unluckily for the missionaries,
it evidently appears, even from Father Charlevoix’ History of New
France, that their labours were the principal cause of the ruin of the
Hurons. That author expressly says, that a great number of those con-
verts would think of nothing but the faith,—that they forgot their ac-
tivity and valour,—that divisions arose between them and the rest of the
nation, &c. That nation was therefore soon destroyed by the Iroquois,
whom they had before been accustomed to conquer.*
To the prince’s inspection of the affairs and concerns of religion we
have joined an authority over its ministers: without the latter power, the
former would be nugatory and ineffectual:—they are both derived from
the same principle. It is absurd, and contrary to the ﬁrst foundations of
society, that any citizens should claim an independence of the sovereign
authority, in ofﬁces of such importance to the repose, thehappiness,and
safety of the state. This is establishing two independent powers in the
same society,—an unfailing source of division, disturbance, and ruin.
There is but one supreme power in the state; the functions of the sub-
ordinate powers vary according to their different objects:—ecclesiastics,
magistrates, and commanders of the troops, are all ofﬁcers of the re-
* History of New France, Books V. VI. and VII.
§140. He
ought to
prevent the
abuse of the
received
religion.
§141. The
sovereign’s
authority over
the ministers
of religion.


chapter xii
167
public, each in his own department; and all are equally accountable to
the sovereign. <64>
A prince cannot indeed justly oblige an ecclesiastic to preach a doc-
trine, or to perform a religious rite, which the latter does notthinkagree-
able to the will of God. But if the minister cannot, in this respect, con-
form to the will of his sovereign, he ought to resign his station, and
consider himself as a man who is not called to ﬁll it,—two things being
necessary for the discharge of the duty annexed to it, viz. to teach and
behave with sincerity, according to the dictates of his own conscience,
and to conform to the prince’s intentions, and the laws of thestate.Who
can forbear being ﬁlled with indignation, at seeing a bishop audaciously
resist the orders of the sovereign, and the decrees of the supreme tri-
bunals, solemnly declaring that he thinks himself accountable to God
alone, for the power with which he is intrusted?
On the other hand, if the clergy are rendered contemptible, it will be
out of their power to produce the fruits for which their ministry was
appointed. The rule that should be followed with respect to them may
be comprised in a few words:—let them enjoy a large portion of esteem;
but let them have no authority, and still less any claim to independence.
In the ﬁrst place, let the clergy, as well as every other order of men, be,
in their functions, as in every thing else, subject to the public power,and
accountable to the sovereign for their conduct. Secondly, let the prince
take care to render the ministers of religion respectable in the eyes of
the people; let him trust them with the degree of authority necessary to
enable them to discharge their duty with success;lethim,incaseof need,
support them with the power he possesses. Every man in ofﬁce ought to
be vested with an authority commensurate to his functions; otherwise
he will be unable to discharge them in a proper manner. I see no reason
why the clergy should be excepted from this general rule; only theprince
should be more particularly watchful that they do not abuse their au-
thority; the affair being altogether the most delicate, and the most fruit-
ful in dangers. If he renders the character of churchmen respectable, he
should take care that this respect be not carried to such a superstitious
veneration, as shall arm the hand of an ambitious priest with a powerful
engine with which he may force weak minds into whatever direction he
§142. Nature
of this
authority.
§143. Rule to
be observed
with respect to
ecclesiastics.

168
book i: nations in themselves
pleases. When once the clergy become a separate body, they becomefor-
midable. The Romans (we shall often have occasion to recur to them)—
the wise Romans elected from among the senators their pontifex-
maximus,42 and the principal ministers of the altar; they knew no dis-
tinction between clergy and laity; nor had they a set of gownsmen to
constitute a separate class from the rest of the citizens.
If the sovereign be deprived of this power in matters of religion, and
this authority over the clergy, how shall he preserve the religion pure
from the admixture of any thing contrary to the welfare of the state?
How can he cause it to be constantly taught and practised in the manner
most conducive to the pub-<65>lic welfare? And especially, how can he
prevent the disorders it may occasion, either by its doctrines,ortheman-
ner in which its discipline is exerted? These cares and duties can only
belong to the sovereign, and nothing can dispense with his discharging
them.
Hence we see that the prerogatives of the crown, in ecclesiastical af-
fairs, have been constantly and faithfully defended by the parliaments
of France. The wise and learned magistrates of whom those illustrious
bodies are composed, are sensible of the maxims which sound reason
dictates on this subject. They know how important it is not to suffer an
affair of so delicate a nature, so extensive in its connections and inﬂu-
ence, and so momentous in its consequences, to be placed beyond the
reach of the public authority.—What! Shall ecclesiasticspresumetopro-
pose to the people, as an articleof faith,someobscureanduselessdogma,
which constitutes no essential part of the received religion?—shall they
exclude from the church, and defame those who do not shew a blind
obedience?—shall they refuse them the sacraments, and even the rites
of burial?—and shall not the prince have power to protect his subjects,
and preserve the kingdom from a dangerous schism?
The kings of England have asserted the prerogatives of their crown:
they have caused themselves to be acknowledged heads of the church;
and this regulation is equally approved by reason and sound policy, and
42. The pontifex maximus was the high priest of the ancient Roman College of
Pontiffs.
§144. Recapit-
ulation of the
reasons which
establish the
sovereign’s
rights in
matters of
religion.
Authorities
and examples.


chapter xii
169
is also conformable to ancient custom. The ﬁrst christian emperors ex-
ercised all the functions of heads of the church; they made laws on
subjects relating to it,*—summoned councils, and presided in them,—
appointed and deposed bishops, &c. In Switzerland there are wise re-
publics, whose sovereigns, knowing the full extent of the supreme au-
thority, have rendered the ministers of religion subject to it, without
offering violence to their consciences. They have prepared a formulary
of the doctrines that are to be preached, and published laws of ecclesi-
astical discipline, such as they would have it exercised in the countries
under their jurisdiction,—in order that those who will not conform to
these establishments may not devote themselves to the service of the
church. They keep all the ministers of religion in a lawful dependence,
and suffer no exertion of church discipline but under their own au-
thority. It is not probable that religion will ever occasion disturbancesin
these republics.
If Constantine and his successors had caused themselves to be for-
mally acknowledged heads of the church,—and if Christian kings and
princes had, in this instance, known how to maintain the rights of sov-
ereignty,—would the world ever have witnessed those horrid disorders
produced by the pride and ambition of some popes and ecclesiastics,
emboldened by the weakness of princes, and supported by the super-
stition of the people,—<66>rivers of blood shed in the quarrels of
monks, about speculative questions that were often unintelligible, and
almost always as useless to the salvation of souls, as in themselves in-
different to the welfare of society,—citizens and even brothers armed
against each other,—subjects excited to revolt, and kings hurled from
their thrones? Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum! 43 The history of
the emperors Henry IV.44 Frederic I.45 Frederic II.46 and Louis of Ba-
* See the Theodosian Code.
43. “So potent was religion in persuading to evil deeds.” Lucretius, De rerum na-
tura I.102.
44. Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor, r. 1084–1105, and king of Germany,r.1056–
1105.
45. Frederic I, Holy Roman Emperor, r. 1155–90.
46. Frederic II, Holy Roman Emperor, r. 1220–50.
§145. Perni-
cious conse-
quences of
the contrary
opinion.


170
book i: nations in themselves
varia, arewell known. Wasitnottheindependenceof theecclesiastics,—
was it not that system in which the affairs of religion are submitted to
a foreign power,—that plunged France into the horrors of the league,
and had nearly deprived her of the best and greatest of her kings? Had
it not been for that strange and dangerous system, would a foreigner,
pope Sixtus V. have undertaken to violate the fundamental law of the
kingdom, and declared the lawful heir incapable of wearing the crown?
Would the world have seen, at other times and in other places,* the suc-
cession to the crown rendered uncertain by a bare informality—the
want of a dispensation, whose validity was disputed,andwhichaforeign
prelate claimed the sole right of granting? Would that same foreigner
have arrogated to himself the power of pronouncing on the legitimacy
of the issue of a king? Would kings have been assassinated in conse-
quence of a detestable doctrine?† Would a part of France have been
afraid to acknowledge the best of their kings,‡ until he had received
absolution from Rome? And would many other princes have been un-
able to give a solid peace to their people, because no decision could be
formed within their own dominions on articles or conditions in which
religion was interested?§
All we have advanced on this subject, so evidently ﬂows from the no-
tions of independence and sovereignty, that it will never be disputed by
any honest man who endeavours to reason justly. If a state cannotﬁnally
determine every thing relating to religion, the nation is not free, and the
prince is but half a sovereign. There is no medium in this case; either
each state must, within its own territories, possess supreme power inthis
respect, as well as in all others, or we must adopt the system of Boni-
face VIII.47 and consider all Roman catholic countries as forming only
one state, of which the pope shall be the supreme head, and the kings
* In England, under Henry VIII.
† Henry III. and Henry IV. assassinated by fanatics, who thought they were serv-
ing God and the church by stabbing their king.
‡ ThoughHenry IV.returnedtotheRomishreligion,agreatnumberof Catholics
did not dare to acknowledge him until he had received the pope’s absolution.
§ Many kings of France in the civil wars on account of religion.
47. Pope Boniface VIII, r. 1294–1303.
§146. The
abuses particu-
larised. 1. The
power of the
popes.


chapter xii
171
subordinate administrators of temporal affairs, each in his province,—
nearly as the sultans were formerly under the authority of the caliphs.
We know that the above-mentioned pope had the presumption to write
to Philip the Fair, king of France, Scire te volumus, quod in spiritualibus
& tempo-<67>ralibus nobis subes*—“We would have thee know that
thou art subject to us as well in temporals as in spirituals.” And we may
see in the canon law† his famous bull Unam sanctam, 48 in which he at-
tributes to the church two swords, or a double power, spiritual and tem-
poral,—condemns those who think otherwise, as men, who, after the
example of the Manicheans, establish two principles,—and ﬁnally de-
clares, that it is an article of faith, necessary to salvation, to believe that
every human creature is subject to the Roman pontiff.‡
* Turretin. Hist. Ecclesiast. Compendium, p. 182. Where may also be seen the res-
olute answer of the king of France.
† Extravag. Commun. Lib. I. Tit. De Majoritate & Obedientia.
‡ Gregory VII. endeavoured to render almost all the states of Europe tributary to
him. He maintained that Hungary, Dalmatia, Russia, Spain, and Corsica, were ab-
solutely his property, as successor to St. Peter, or were feudatory dependencies of the
holy see. Greg. Epist. Concil. Vol. VI. Edit. Harduin [[Harduin, Conciliorum col-
lection]].—He summoned the emperor Henry IV. to appear before him, and make
his defence against the accusations of some of his subjects: and, on the emperor’s
non-compliance, he deposed him. In short, here are the expressions he made use of
in addressing the council assembled at Rome on the occasion: “Agite nunc, quaeso,
patres et principes sanctissimi, ut omnis mundus intelligat et cognoscat, quia si po-
testis in coelo ligare et solvere, potestis in terra imperia, regna, principatus, ducatus,
marchias, comitatus, et omnium hominum possessiones, pro meritis tollere uni-
cuique et concedere.” [[“Act now, I beseech you, fathers and most holy princes [car-
dinals], that all the world may understand and know that if you have power to bind
and loose in heaven, you have the same power on earth over each and every one to
take away and to grant, according to deserts, empires, kingdoms, dominions[orprin-
cipalities], dukedoms, marches, retinues, and the possessions of all men” (trans.
Eds.).]] Natal. [[Noell]] Alex. Dissert. Hist. Eccl. s. xi. and xii. p. 384.
Thecanonlawboldlydecidesthattheregalpowerissubordinatetothepriesthood.
“Imperium nonpraeest sacerdotio,sedsubest,eteiobediretenetur.”[[“[Royal]power
is not superior to the priesthood, but is subordinate and is required to obey it.” De-
cretals of Pope Gregory IX, bk. I, chap. vi, titulus 33, “De maioritate et obedienta.”]]
Rubric. ch. vi. De Major. et Obed. “Et est multum allegabile,” [[“And it is very
excusable”]] is the complaisant remark of the writer of the article. [[Note added in
1773/1797 editions.]]
48. The papal bull Unam sanctam, 1302.


172
book i: nations in themselves
We shall consider the enormous power of the popes as the ﬁrst abuse
that sprung from this system, which divests sovereigns of theirauthority
in matters of religion. This power in a foreign court directly militates
against the independence of nations and the sovereignty of princes. It
is capable of overturning a state; and wherever it is acknowledged, the
sovereign ﬁnds it impossible to exercise his authority in such a manner
as is most for the advantage of the nation. We have already, in the last
section, given several remarkable instances of this; and history presents
others without number. The senate of Sweden having condemnedTrol-
lius,49 archbishop of Upsal, for the crime of rebellion, to be degraded
from his see, and to end his days in a monastery, pope Leo X.50 had the
audacity to excommunicate the administrator Steno, and the wholesen-
ate, and sentenced them to rebuild at their own expense a fortress be-
longing to the archbishop, which they had caused to be demolished,and
pay a ﬁne of a hundred thousand ducats to the deposed prelate.* The
barbarous Christiern,51 king of Denmark, took advantage of this decree
to lay waste the territories of Sweden, and to spill the blood of the most
illustrious of her nobility. Paul V.52 thundered out an interdict against
Venice, on account of some very wise laws made with respect to the
government of the city, but which displeased that pontiff, who thus
threw the republic into an embarrassment, from which all the wisdom
and ﬁrmness of the senate found it difﬁcult to extricate it. Pius V.53 in
his <68> bull In Coena Domini, of theyear1567,declares,thatallprinces
who shall introduce into their dominions any new taxes, of what nature
soever they be, or shall increase the ancient ones, without having ﬁrst
obtained the approbationof theholysee,areipsofacto excommunicated.
Is not this a direct attack on the independence of nations, and a sub-
version of the authority of sovereigns?
In those unhappy times, those dark ages that preceded the revival of
* History of the Revolutions in Sweden [[Rene´-Aubert de Vertot]].
49. Trollius, archbishop of Upsal, was condemned in 1515.
50. Pope Leo X, r. 1513–21.
51. Christiern, king of Denmark, r. 1513–23.
52. Pope Paul V, r. 1605–21.
53. Pope Pius V, r. 1566–72.


chapter xii
173
literature and the reformation, the popes attempted to regulate the ac-
tions of princes, under the pretence of conscience,—to judge of the
validity of their treaties,—to break their alliances, and declare them null
and void. But those attempts met with a vigorous resistance, even in a
country which is generally thought to have then possessed valour alone,
with a very small portion of knowledge. The pope’s nuncio, in order to
detach the Swiss from the interests of France, published a monitory
against all those cantons that favoured Charles VIII. declaring them ex-
communicated,54 if within the space of ﬁfteen days they did not aban-
don the cause of that prince, and enter into the confederacy which was
formed against him: but the Swiss opposed this act by protestingagainst
it as an iniquitous abuse, and caused their protest to be publicly posted
up in all the places under their jurisdiction,—thus shewing their con-
tempt for a proceeding that was equally absurd and derogatory to the
rights of sovereigns.* We shall mention several other similar attempts,
when we come to treat of the faith of treaties.
This power in the popes has given birth to another abuse, that de-
serves the utmost attention from a wise government. We see several
countries in which ecclesiastical dignities, and all the higher beneﬁces,
are distributed by a foreign power,—by the pope,—who bestows them
on his creatures, and very often on men who are not subjects of thestate.
This practice is at once a violation of the nation’s rights, and of the
principles of common policy. A nation ought not to suffer foreigners to
dictate laws to her, to interfere in her concerns, or deprive her of her
natural advantages: and yet how does it happen that so many states still
tamely suffer a foreigner to dispose of posts and employments of the
highest importance to their peace and happiness? The princes who con-
sented to the introduction of so enormous an abuse, were equally want-
ing to themselves and their people. In our times the court of Spain has
been obliged to expend immense sums in order to recover without dan-
* Vogel’s Historical and Political Treatise on the Alliances between France and the
Thirteen Cantons, p. 33, and 36.
54. Pope Alexander VI, r. 1492–1503; Charles VIII of France, r. 1483–98, excom-
municated in 1495.
§147.
2. Important
employments
conferred by a
foreign power.

174
book i: nations in themselves
ger the peaceable possession of a right which essentially belonged to the
nation, or its head.
Even in those states whose sovereigns have preserved so important a
prerogative of the crown, the abuse in a great measure subsists. The sov-
ereign nominates indeed to bishoprics <69> and great beneﬁces; but his
authority is not sufﬁcient to enable the persons nominated to enter on
the exercise of their functions; they must also have bulls from Rome.*
By this and a thousand other links of attachment, the whole body of
the clergy, in those countries, still depend on the court of Rome; from
it they expect dignities,—from it, that purple, which, according to the
proud pretensions of those who are invested with it, renders them equal
to sovereigns: from the resentment of that court, they have every thing
to fear; and of course we see them almost invariably disposed to gratify
it on every occasion. On the other hand, the court of Rome supports
those clergy with all her might,—assists them by her politics and
credit,—protects them against their enemies, and against those who
would set bounds to their power,—nay, often against the just indigna-
tion of their sovereign,—and by this means attaches them to her still
morestrongly. Isitnotdoinganinjurytotherightsof society,andshock-
ing the ﬁrst elements of government, thus to suffer a great number of
subjects, and even subjects in high posts, to be dependent on a foreign
prince, and entirely devoted to him? Would a prudent sovereign receive
men who preached such doctrines? There needed no more to cause all
the missionaries to be driven from China.
It was for the purpose of more ﬁrmly securing the attachment of
churchmen, that the celibacy of the clergy was invented. A priest, a prel-
ate, already bound to the see of Rome by his functions and his hopes,
is further detached from his country, by the celibacy he is obliged to
observe. He is not connected with civil society by a family: his grand
* We may see in the letters of Cardinal d’Ossat [[b. 1536–d. 1604]], what difﬁ-
culties, what opposition, what long delays Henry IV. had to encounter when he
wished to confer the archbishopric of Sens on Renauld de Baune, archbishop of
Bourges, who had saved France, by receiving that great prince into the Roman cath-
olic church.
§148.
3. Powerful
subjects de-
pendent on a
foreign court.
§149.
4. The celibacy
of the priests.
chapter xii
175
interests are all centred in the church; and provided he has the pope’s
favour, he has no further concern: in what country soever he was born,
Rome is his refuge, the centre of his adopted country. Every bodyknows
that the religious orders are a sort of papal militia, spread over the face
of the earth, to support and advance the interests of theirmonarch.This
is doubtless a strange abuse,—a subversion of the ﬁrst laws of society.
But this is not all: if the prelates were married, they might enrich the
state with a number of good citizens; rich beneﬁces affording them the
means of giving their legitimate children a suitable education. But what
a multitude of men are there in convents, consecrated to idleness under
the cloak of devotion! Equally useless to society in peace and war, they
neitherserve itby theirlabourinnecessaryprofessions,norbytheircour-
age in arms: yet they enjoy immense revenues; and the people are
obliged, by the sweat of their brow, to furnish support for these swarms
of sluggards. What should we think of a husbandman who pro-
<70>tected useless hornets to devour the honey of his bees?* It is not
the fault of the fanatic preachers of over-strained sanctity, if all their
devotees do not imitate the celibacy of the monks. How happened it
that princes could suffer them publicly to extol, as the most sublime
virtue, a practice equally repugnant to nature, and pernicious to society?
Among the Romans, laws were made to diminish the number of those
who lived in celibacy, and to favour marriage:† but superstition soon
attacked such just and wise regulations; and the christian emperors, per-
suaded by churchmen, thought themselves obliged to abrogate them.‡
Several of the fathers of the church have censured those laws against
celibacy,—doubtless, says a great man,§ with a laudable zeal for the things
of another life, but with very little knowledge of the affairs of this. That
great man lived in the church of Rome:—he did not dare to assert in
* This reﬂection has no relation to the religious houses in which literature is cul-
tivated. Establishments that afford to learned men a peaceful retreat, and that leisure
and tranquillity required in deep scientiﬁc research, are always laudable, and may
become very useful to the state.
† The Papia-Poppaean law.
‡ In the Theodosian Code.
§ The president de Montesquieu, in his Spirit of Laws.
Convents.


176
book i: nations in themselves
direct terms, that voluntary celibacy is to be condemned even with re-
spect to conscience and the things of another life:—but it is certainly a
conduct well becoming genuine piety, to conform ourselves to nature,
to fulﬁl the views of the Creator, and to labour for the welfare of society.
If a person is capable of rearing a family, let him marry, let him be at-
tentive to give his children a good education:—in so doing, he will dis-
charge his duty, and be undoubtedly in the road to salvation.
The enormous and dangerous pretensions of the clergy are also an-
other consequence of this system which places every thing relating to
religion beyond the reach of the civil power. In the ﬁrst place, the ec-
clesiastics, under pretence of the holiness of their functions, have raised
themselves above all the other citizens, even the principal magistrates:
and, contrary to the express injunctions of their master, who said to his
apostles seek not the ﬁrst places at feasts, they have almost every where
arrogated to themselves the ﬁrst rank. Their head, in the Roman church,
obliges sovereigns to kiss his feet; emperors have held the bridle of his
horse; and if bishops or even simple priests do not at present raise them-
selves above their prince, it is because the times will not permit it: they
have not always been so modest; and one of their writers has had the
assurance to assert, that a priest is as much above a king, as a man is above
a beast.* How many authors, better known and more esteemed than
the one just quoted, have taken a pleasure in praising and extollingthat
silly speech attributed to the emperor Theodosius <71> theFirst—Am-
brose has taught me the great distance there is between the empire and the
priesthood!
We have already observed that ecclesiastics ought to be honoured:but
modesty, and even humility, should characterise them: and does it be-
come them to forget it in their own conduct, while they preach it to
others? I would not mention a vain ceremonial, wereitnotattendedwith
* Tantum sacerdos praestat regi, quantum homo bestiae. StanislausOrichovius.—
Vide Tribbechov. Exerc. 1. ad Baron. Annal. Sect. 2. [[Adam Tribbechov, Exercitationes
ad Baronii Annales, 1667]] & Thomas. Nat. ad Lancell. [[Thomasius’s edition of
Paolo Lancellotti’s Institutiones Juris Canonici (Halle, 1715–17)]].
§150.
5. Enormous
pretensions of
the clergy.
Pre-eminence.


chapter xii
177
very material consequences, from the pride with which it inspires many
priests, and the impressions it may make on the minds of the people. It
is essentially necessary to good order, that subjects should behold none
in society so respectable as their sovereign, and, next to him, those on
whom he has devolved a part of his authority.
Ecclesiastics have not stopped in so fair a path. Not contented with
rendering themselves independent with respect to their functions,—by
the aid of the court of Rome, they have even attempted to withdraw
themselves entirely, and in every respect, from all subjection to the po-
litical authority. There have been times when an ecclesiastic could not
be brought before a secular tribunal for any crime whatsoever.* The
canon law declares expressly, It is indecent for laymen to judge a church-
man.† The popes Paul III. Pius V. and Urban VIII.55 excommunicated
all lay judges who should presume to undertake the trial of ecclesiastics.
Even the bishops of France have not been afraid to say on several oc-
casions, that they did not depend on any temporal prince; and, in 1656, the
general assembly of the French clergy had the assurance to use the fol-
lowing expressions—“The decree of council having been read, was disap-
proved by the assembly, because it leaves the king judge over the bishops, and
* The Congregation of Immunities has decided that the cognisance of causes
against ecclesiastics, even for the crime of high treason, exclusively belongs to the
spiritual court:—“Cognitio causae contra ecclesiasticos, etiam pro delicto laesae ma-
jestatis, ﬁeri debet a judice ecclesiastico.” Ricci Synops. Decret. et Resol. S. Congreg.
Immunit. p. 105.—A constitution of pope Urban VI. pronounces those sovereigns
or magistratesguiltyof sacrilege,whoshallbanishanecclesiasticfromtheirterritories,
and declares them to have ipso facto incurred the sentence of excommunication.
Cap. II. De Foro Compet. in VII.—To this immunity may be added the indulgence
shewn by the ecclesiastical tribunals to the clergy, on whom they never inﬂicted any
but slight punishments, even for the most atrocious crimes. The dreadful disorders
that arose from this cause at length produced their own remedy in France, where the
clergy were at length subjected to the temporal jurisdiction for all transgressions that
are injurious to society. See Papon Arreˆts Notables. Book I. tit V. Act 34. [[Note
added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
† Indecorum est laı¨cos homines viros ecclesiasticos judicare. Can. in nona actione
22. XVI. q. 7.
55. Pope Paul III, r. 1534–49; Pope Urban VIII, r. 1623–44.
§151.
6. Inde-
pendence.
Immunities.


178
book i: nations in themselves
seems to subject their immunities to his judges.* There are decrees of the
popes that excommunicate whoever imprisons a bishop. According to
the principles of the church of Rome, a prince has not the power of
punishing an ecclesiastic with death, though a rebel, or a malefactor;—
he must ﬁrst apply to the ecclesiastical power; and the latter will, if it
thinks proper, deliver up the culprit to the secular arm, after having de-
graded him.† History affords <72> us a thousand examples of bishops
who remained unpunished, or were but slightly chastised, for crimes for
which nobles of the highest rank forfeited their lives. John de Braganza,
king of Portugal, justly inﬂicted the penalty of deathonthosenoblemen
* See the Statement of Facts on the System of the Independence of Bishops. [[Henri-
Philippe Chauvelin, Tradition des faits, qui manifestent le siste`me d’inde´pendance que
les e´veˆques ont oppose´ dans les diffe´rens sie`cles aux principes invariables de la justice sou-
veraine du roi sur tous ses sujets, 1753.]]
† In the year 1725, a parish-priest, of the canton of Lucerne, having refused to
appear before the supreme council, was,forhiscontumacy,banishedfromthecanton.
Hereupon, his diocesan, the bishop of Constance, had the assurance to write to the
council that they had infringed the ecclesiastical immunities,—that “it is unlawfulto
subject the ministers of God to the decisions of the temporal power.” In these pre-
tensions, he was sanctioned by the approbation of the pope’s nuncio and the court
of Rome. But the council of Lucerne ﬁrmly supported the rights of sovereignty,
and—without engaging with the bishop in a controversy which would have been
derogatory to their dignity,—answeredhim—“YourLordshipquotesvariouspassages
from the writings of the fathers, which we, on our side, might also quote in our own
favour, if it were necessary, or if there was question of deciding the contest by dint
of quotations. But let your Lordship rest assured that we have a right to summon
before us a priest, our natural subject, who encroaches on our prerogatives,—topoint
out to him his error,—to exhort him to a reform of his conduct,—and, in conse-
quence of his obstinate disobedience after repeated citations, to banish him from our
dominions. We have not the least doubt that this right belongs to us; and we are
determined to defend it. And indeed it ought not to be proposed to any sovereign to
appear as party in a contest with a refractory subject like him,—to refer the cause to
the decision of a third party, whoever he be,—and run the risk of being condemned
to tolerate in the state a person of such character, with what dignity soever he might
be invested,” &c. The bishop of Constance had proceeded so far as to assert, in his
letter to the canton, dated December 18, 1725, that “churchmen, as soon as they have
received holy orders, cease to be natural subjects, and are thus releasedfromthebond-
age in which they lived before.” Memorial on the Dispute between the Pope and the
Canton of Lucerne, p. 65. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]


chapter xii
179
who had conspired his destruction; but he did not dare to put to death
the archbishop of Braga, the author of that detestable plot.*56
For an entire body of men, numerous and powerful, to stand beyond
the reach of the public authority, and be dependent on a foreign court,
is an entire subversion of order in the republic, and a manifest dimi-
nution of the sovereignty. This is a mortal stab given to society, whose
very essence it is that every citizen should be subject to the public au-
thority. Indeed the immunity which the clergy arrogate to themselves in
this respect, is so inimical to the natural and necessary rights of a nation,
that the king himself has not the power of granting it. But churchmen
will tell us they derive this immunity from God himself: but till they
have furnished some proof of their pretensions, let us adhere to this
certain principle, that God desires thesafetyof states,andnotthatwhich
will only be productive of disorder and destruction to them.
The same immunity is claimed for the possessions of the church.The
state might, no doubt, exempt those possessions from every species of
tax at a time when they were scarcely sufﬁcient for the support of the
ecclesiastics: but, for that favour, these men ought to be indebted to the
public authority alone, which has always a right to revoke it, whenever
the welfare of the state makes it necessary. It being one of the funda-
mental and essential laws of every society, that, in case of necessity, the
wealth of all the members ought to contribute proportionally to <73>
the common necessities,—the prince himself cannot, of his own au-
thority, grant a total exemption to a very numerous and rich body, with-
out being guilty of extreme injusticetotherest of hissubjects,onwhom,
in consequence of that exemption, the whole weight of the burthenwill
fall.
The possessions of the church are so far from being entitled to an
exemption on account of their being consecrated to God, that, on the
contrary, it is for that very reason they ought to be taken the ﬁrst for the
* [[Rene´-Aubert de Vertot]], Revolutions of Portugal.
56. John de Braganza, King John IV of Portugal, r. 1640–56. The plot to assas-
sinate the king in 1641 was led by the natural son of King Peter II, Jose´ of Braganza,
archbishop of Braga (1703–56).
§152.
7. Immunity
of church
possessions.

180
book i: nations in themselves
use and safety of the state. For nothing is more agreeable to thecommon
Father of mankind than to save a state from ruin. God himself having
no need of any thing, the consecration of wealth to him is but a dedi-
cation of it to such uses as shall be agreeable to him. Besides, a great part
of therevenues of thechurch,bytheconfessionof theclergythemselves,
is destined for the poor. When the state is in necessity, it is doubtless the
ﬁrst and principal pauper, and the most worthy of assistance. We may
extend this principle even to the most common cases, and safely assert
that to supply a part of the current expenses of the state from the rev-
enues of the church, and thus take so much from the weight of the
people’s burthen, is really giving a part of those revenues to the poor,
according to their original destination. Butitis reallycontrarytoreligion
and the intentions of the founders, to waste in pomp, luxury, and epi-
curism, those revenues that ought to be consecrated to the relief of the
poor.*
Not satisﬁed however with rendering themselves independent, the
ecclesiastics undertook to bring mankind under their dominion; and
indeed they had reason to despise the stupid mortals who suffered them
to proceed in their plan. Excommunication was a formidable weapon
among ignorant and superstitious men, who neither knew how to keep
it within its proper bounds, nor to distinguish between the use and the
abuse of it. Hence arose disorders, which have prevailed even in some
protestant countries. Churchmen have presumed, by their own author-
ity alone, to excommunicate men in high employments, magistrates
whose functions were daily useful to society,—and have boldly asserted
that those ofﬁcers of the state, being struck with the thunders of the
church, could no longer discharge the duty of their posts. What a per-
version of order and reason! What! shall not a nation be allowed to in-
trust its affairs, its happiness, its repose and safety, to the hands of those
whom it deems the most skilful and the most worthy of that trust? Shall
the power of a churchman, whenever he pleases, deprive the state of its
wisest conductors, of its ﬁrmest supports, and rob the prince of hismost
faithfulservants?Soabsurdapretensionhasbeencondemnedbyprinces,
* See Letters on the Pretensions of the Clergy.
§153.
8. Excommu-
nication of
men in ofﬁce.
chapter xii
181
and even by prelates, respectable for their character and judgment. We
read in the 171st letter of Ives de Chartres,57 to the archbishop of Sens,
that the royal capi-<74>tularies (conformably to the thirteenth canon
of thetwelfthcouncilof Toledo,heldintheyear681)enjoinedthepriests
to admit to their conversation all those whom the king’s majesty had
received into favour, or entertained at his table, though they had been
excommunicated by them, or by others,—in order that the church
might not appear to reject or condemn those whom the king waspleased
to employ in his service.*
The excommunications pronounced against the sovereigns them-
selves, and accompanied with the absolution of their subjects fromtheir
oaths of allegiance, put the ﬁnishing stroke to this enormous abuse; and
it is almost incredible that nations should have suffered such odiouspro-
cedures. We have slightly touched on this subject in §§145 and 146. The
thirteenth century gives striking instances of it. Otho IV. for endeav-
ouring to oblige several provinces of Italy to submit to the laws of the
empire, was excommunicated and deprived of the empire by Inno-
cent III.58 and hissubjectsabsolvedfromtheiroathof allegiance.Finally,
this unfortunate emperor, being abandoned by the princes, was obliged
to resign the crown to Frederic II. John, king of England, endeavouring
to maintain the rights of his kingdom in the election of an archbishop
of Canterbury,59 found himself exposed to the audacious enterprises of
the same pope. Innocent excommunicated the king,—laid the whole
kingdom under an interdict,—had the presumption to declare John un-
worthy of the throne, and to absolve his subjects from their oath of
ﬁdelity: he stirred up the clergy against him,—excited his subjects to
rebel,—solicited the king of France to take up arms to dethrone him,—
publishing at the same time a crusade againsthim,ashewouldhavedone
against the Saracens. The king of England at ﬁrst appeared determined
to defend himself with vigour: but soon losing courage, hesufferedhim-
* See Letters on the Pretensions of the Clergy.
57. Ives (Ivo) de Chartres, ca. 1040–1116, bishop of Chartres.
58. Otho IV, Holy Roman Emperor, r. 1209–15; Pope Innocent III, r. 1198–1216.
59. John de Gray, 1205.
§154.
9. And of
sovereigns
themselves.


182
book i: nations in themselves
self to be brought to such an excess of infamy, as to resign his kingdoms
into the hands of the pope’s legate, to receive them back from him, and
hold them as a ﬁef of the church, on condition of paying tribute.*
The popes were not the only persons guilty of such enormities: there
have also been councils who bore a part in them. That of Lyons, sum-
moned by Innocent IV.60 in the year 1245, had the audacity to cite the
emperor Frederic II. to appear before them in order to exculpatehimself
from the charges brought against him,—threatening him with thethun-
ders of the church if he failed to do it. That great prince did not give
himself much trouble about so irregular a proceeding. He said, “thatthe
pope aimed at rendering himself both a judge and a sovereign; but that,
from all antiquity, the emperors themselves had called councils, where
the popes and prelates rendered to them, as to their sovereigns, the re-
spect and obedience that <75> was their due.”† The emperor, however,
thinking it necessary to yield a little to the superstition of the times,
condescended to send ambassadors to the council, to defend his cause:
but this did not prevent the pope from excommunicating him, and de-
claring him deprived of the crown. Frederic, like a man of a superior
genius, laughed at the empty thunders of the Vatican, and proved him-
self able to preserve the crown in spite of the election of Henry, Land-
grave of Thuringia,61 whom the ecclesiastical electors, and many bish-
ops, had presumed to declare king of the Romans,—but who obtained
little more by that election, than the ridiculous title of king of the priests.
I should never have done, were I to accumulate examples: but those
I have already quoted are but too many for the honour of humanity. It
is an humiliating sight to behold the excess of folly to whichsuperstition
had reduced the nations of Europe in those unhappy times.‡
60. Pope Innocent IV, r. 1243–54.
61. Henry, Landgrave of Thuringia, r. 1292–1308.
* Matthew Paris.—Turretin. Compend. Hist. Eccles. Secul. XIII.
† Heiss’s History of the Empire, Book II. Chap. XVI.
‡ Sovereigns were sometimes found, who, without considering future conse-
quences, favoured the papal encroachments when they were likely to prove advan-
tageous to their own interests. Thus Louis VIII.[[r.1223–26]]kingof France,wishing
to invade the territories of the count of Toulouse, under pretence of making war on


chapter xii
183
By means of the same spiritual arms, the clergy drew every thing to
themselves, usurped the authority of the tribunals, and disturbed the
course of justice. They claimed a right to take cognisance of all causes,
on account of sin, of which (says Innocent III.)* every man of sense must
know that the cognisance belongs to our ministry. In the year 1329, the prel-
ates of France had the assurance to tell king Philip de Valois, that, to
prevent causes of any kind from being brought before the ecclesiastical
courts, was depriving the church of all its rights, omnia ecclesiarum jura
tollere.†62 And accordingly it was their aim to have to themselves the
decision of all disputes. They boldly opposed the civil authority, and
made themselves feared by proceeding in the way of excommunication.
It even happened sometimes, that, as dioceses were not always conﬁned
to the extent of the <76> political territory, a bishop would summon
foreigners before his tribunal, for causes purely civil, and take upon him
to decide them, in manifest violation of the rights of nations. To such
a height had the disorder arisen three or four centuries ago, that our wise
ancestors thought themselves obliged to take serious measures to put a
the Albigenses, requested of the pope, among other things, “that he would issue a
bull, declaring that the two Raymonds, father and son, together with all their ad-
herents, associates, and allies, had been and were deprived of all their possessions.”
Velly’s Hist. of France. Vol IV. p. 33.—Of a similar nature to the preceding, is the
following remarkable fact. Pope Martin IV. excommunicated Peter, king of Arra-
gon,—declared that he had forfeited his kingdom, all his lands, and even the regal
dignity,—and pronounced his subjects absolved from their oaths of allegiance. He
even excommunicated all who should acknowledge him as king, or perform towards
him any of the duties of a subject. He then offered Arragon and Catalonia to the
count de Valois, secondsonof PhiliptheBold,onconditionthatheandhissuccessors
should acknowledge themselves vassals of the holy see, take an oath of fealty to the
pope, and pay him a yearly tribute. The king of France assembled the barons and
prelates of his kingdom to deliberate on the pope’s offer; and they advised him to
accept it:—“Strange blindness of kings and their counsellors!” exclaims, with good
reason, a modern historian: “they did not perceive, that, by thus accepting kingdoms
from the hands of the pope, they strengthened and established his pretensions to the
right of deposingthemselves.”Velly’sHist.of France. Vol. VI.p. 190.[[Noteadded
in 1773/1797 editions.]]
* In cap. Novit. de Judiciis.
† See Leibnitii Codex Juris Gent. Diplomat. Dipl. LXVII. §9.
62. “To acknowledge all ecclesiastical laws.”
§155.
10. The clergy
drawing every
thing to them-
selves, and
disturbing
the order of
justice.


184
book i: nations in themselves
stop to it; and stipulated in their treaties, that none of the confederates
should be summoned before spiritual courts, for money debts, since every one
ought to be contented with the ordinary modes of justice that were observed
in the country.* We ﬁnd in history that the Swiss on many occasions
repressed the encroachments of the bishops and their judges.
Over every affair of life they extended their authority, underpretence
that conscience was concerned. They obliged new-married husbands to
purchase permission to lie with their wives, the ﬁrst three nights after
marriage.†
This burlesqueinventionleadsustoremarkanotherabuse,manifestly
contrary to the rules of a wise policy, and to the duty a nation owes to
herself,—I mean the immense sums, which bulls, dispensations,&c.an-
nually drew to Rome, from all the countries in communion with her.
How much might be said on the scandalous trade of indulgences! but
it at last became ruinous to the court of Rome, which, by endeavouring
to gain too much, suffered irreparable losses.
Finally, that independent authority intrusted to ecclesiastics, who
were often incapable of understanding the true maxims of government,
or too careless to take the trouble of studying them, and whose minds
were wholly occupied by a visionary fanaticism, by empty speculations,
and notions of a chimerical and overstrained purity,—that authority, I
say, produced, underthe pretenceof sanctity,lawsandcustomsthatwere
pernicious to the state. Some of these we have noticed: but a very re-
markable instance is mentioned by Grotius. “In the ancient Greek
church,” says he, “was long observed a canon, by which those who had
killed an enemy in any war whatsoever, were excommunicated for three
years.”‡ A ﬁnereward decreed fortheheroeswhodefendedtheircountry,
instead of the crowns and triumphs with which pagan Rome had been
* Ibid. Alliance of Zurich with the cantons of Uri, Schweitz, and Underwald,
dated May 1, 1351, §7.
† See A Regulation of Parliament in an arret of March 19, 1409. Spirit of Laws.
These (says Montesquieu) were the very best nights they could pitch upon: they
would have made no great proﬁt of any other.
‡ De Jure Belli & Pacis, Lib. II. Cap. XXIV. He quotes Basil ad Amphiloch. X. 13.
Zonarcas in Niceph. Phoc. Vol. III.
§156.
11. Money
drawn to
Rome.
§157.
12. Laws and
customs
contrary to
the welfare
of states.


chapter xiii
185
accustomed to honour them! Pagan Rome became mistress of the
world:—she adorned herbravestwarriorswithcrowns.Theempire,hav-
ing embraced christianity, soon became a prey to barbarians:—her sub-
jects, by defending her, incurred the penalty of a degrading excom-
munication. By devoting themselves to an idle life, they thought
themselves pursuing the path to heaven, and actually found themselves
in the high road to riches and greatness. <77>
chapter xiii
Of Justice and Polity.
Next to the care of religion, oneof the principaldutiesof anationrelates
to justice. They ought to employ their utmost attention in causing it to
prevail in the state, and to take proper measures for having it dispensed
to every one in the most certain, the most speedy, and the least bur-
thensome manner. This obligation ﬂows from the object proposed by
uniting in civil society, and from the social compact itself. We have seen
(§15) that men have bound themselves by the engagements of society,
and consented to divest themselves, in its favour, of a part of their nat-
ural liberty, only with a view of peaceably enjoying what belongs to
them, and obtaining justice with certainty. The nation would therefore
neglect her duty to herself, and deceive the individuals, if she did not
seriously endeavour to make the strictest justice prevail. This attention
she owes to her own happiness, repose, and prosperity. Confusion, dis-
order, and despondency, will soon arise in a state, when the citizens are
not sure of easily and speedily obtaining justice in all their disputes:
without this, the civil virtues will become extinguished, and the society
weakened.
There are two methods of making justice ﬂourish,—good laws, and
the attention of the superiors to see them executed. In treating of the
constitution of a state (Chap. III.) we have already shewn, that a nation
ought to establish just and wise laws, and have also pointed out the rea-
sons, why we cannot here enter into the particulars of those laws. If men
§158. A nation
ought to make
justice reign.
§159. To
establish
good laws.

186
book i: nations in themselves
were always equally just, equitable, and enlightened, the laws of nature
would doubtless be sufﬁcient for society. But ignorance, the illusions of
self-love, and the violence of the passions, too often render these sacred
laws ineffectual. And we see, in consequence, that all well-governed na-
tions have perceived the necessity of enacting positive laws. There is a
necessity for general and formal regulations, that each may clearly know
his own rights without being misled by self-deception: sometimes even
it is necessary to deviate from natural equity, in order to prevent abuses
and frauds, and to accommodate ourselves to circumstances; and since
the sensation of duty has frequently so little inﬂuence on the heart of
man, a penal sanction becomes necessary, to give the laws their full ef-
ﬁcacy. Thus is the law of nature converted into civil law.* It would be
dangerous to commit the interests of the citizens to the mere discretion
of those who are to dispense justice. The legislator should assist the un-
derstanding of the judges, force their prejudices and inclinations, and
subdue their will, by simple, ﬁxed, and certain rules. These again are the
civil laws. <78>
The best laws are useless, if they be not observed. The nation ought
then to take pains to support them, and to cause them to be respected
and punctually executed: with this view she cannot adopt measures too
just, too extensive, or too effectual; for hence, in a great degree, depend
her happiness, glory, and tranquillity.
We have already observed (§41) that the sovereign, who represents a
nation and is invested with its authority, is also charged with its duties.
An attention to make justice ﬂourish in the state must then be one of
the principal functions of the prince; and nothing can be more worthy
of the sovereign majesty. The emperor Justinian thus begins his book of
the Institutes: Imperatoriam majestatem non solum armis decoratam, sed
etiam legibus oportet esse armatam, ut utrumque tempus, & bellorum &
pacis, recte possit gubernari. 63 The degree of power intrusted by the na-
* See a dissertation on this subject, in the Loisir Philosophique, page 71 [[byVattel,
published in 1747]].
63. “The imperial majesty should not only be decorated with arms but shouldalso
be armed with laws so that there may be good government in times both of war and
of peace.” Justinian, Institutes, prooemium.
§160. To
enforce them.
§161. Func-
tions and
duties of the
prince in this
respect.


chapter xiii
187
tion to the head of the state, is then the rule of his duties and his func-
tions in the administration of justice. As the nation may either reserve
the legislative power to itself, or intrust it to a select body,—it has also
a right, if it thinks proper, to establish a supreme tribunal to judge of
all disputes, independently of the prince. But the conductor of the state
must naturally have a considerable share in legislation, and it may even
be entirely intrusted to him. In this last case, it is he who must establish
salutary laws, dictated by wisdom and equity: but in all cases, he should
be the guardian of the law; he should watch over those who are invested
with authority, and conﬁne each individual within the bounds of duty.
The executive power naturally belongs to the sovereign,—to every
conductor of a people: he is supposed to be invested with it, in its fullest
extent, when the fundamental laws do not restrict it. When the laws are
established, it is the prince’s province to have them put in execution. To
support them with vigour, and to make a just application of them to all
cases that present themselves, is what we call rendering justice. And this
is the duty of the sovereign, who is naturally the judge of his people.
We have seen the chiefs of some small states perform these functions
themselves:butthiscustombecomesinconvenient,andevenimpossible,
in a great kingdom.
The best and safest method of distributing justice is by establishing
judges, distinguished by their integrity and knowledge, to take cogni-
sance of all the disputes that may arise between the citizens. It is im-
possible for the prince to take upon himself this painful task: he cannot
spare sufﬁcient time either for the thorough investigation of all causes,
or even for the acquisition of the knowledge necessary to decide them.
As the sovereign cannot personally discharge all the functions of gov-
ernment, he should, with a just discernment, reserve to himself such as
he can successfully perform, and are of most importance,—intrusting
the others to ofﬁcers and magistrates who shall execute them under his
authority. There is no inconvenience in trusting the <79> decision of a
law-suit to a body of prudent, honest, and enlightened men:—on the
contrary it is the best mode the prince can possibly adopt; and he fully
acquits himself of the duty he owes to his people in this particular,when
he gives them judges adorned with all the qualities suitable to ministers
§162. How he
is to dispense
justice.
§163. He
ought to
appoint
enlightened
and upright
judges.


188
book i: nations in themselves
of justice: he has then nothing more to do but to watch over their con-
duct, in order that they may not neglect their duty.
The establishment of courts of justice is particularly necessaryforthe
decision of all ﬁscal causes,—that is to say, all the disputes that may arise
between the subjects on the one hand, and, on the other, the persons
who exert the proﬁtable prerogatives of the prince. It would be very
unbecoming, and highly improper for a prince, to take upon him to give
judgment in his own cause:—he cannot be too much on his guard
against the illusions of interest and self-love; and even though he were
capable of resisting their inﬂuence, still he ought not to expose his char-
acter to the rash judgments of the multitude. These important reasons
ought even to prevent his submitting the decision of causes in which he
is concerned, to the ministers and counsellors particularly attached to
his person. In all well-regulated states, in countries that are really states,
and not the dominions of a despot, the ordinary tribunals decide all
causes in which the sovereign is a party, with as much freedom as those
between private persons.
The end of all trials at law is justly to determine the disputes thatarise
between the citizens. If, therefore, suits are prosecuted before an inferior
judge, who examines all the circumstances and proofs relating to them,
it is very proper, that, for the greater safety, the party condemnedshould
be allowed to appeal to a superior tribunal, where the sentence of the
former judge may be examined, and reversed, if it appear to be ill-
founded. But it is necessary that this supreme tribunal should have the
authority of pronouncing a deﬁnitive sentence without appeal: other-
wise the whole proceeding will be vain, and the dispute can never be
determined.
The custom of having recourse to the princehimself,bylayingacom-
plaint at the foot of the throne, when the cause has been ﬁnally deter-
mined by a supreme court, appears to be subject to very great incon-
veniences. It is more easy to deceive the prince by specious reasons, than
a number of magistrates well skilled in the knowledge of the laws; and
experience too plainly shews, what powerful resources are derived from
favour and intrigue in the courts of kings. If this practice be authorised
by the laws of the state, the prince ought always to fear that these com-
§164. The
ordinary
courts should
determine
causes relating
to the revenue.
§165. There
ought to be
established
supreme courts
of justice,
wherein causes
should be
ﬁnally deter-
mined.


the law of nations



the
LAW OF NATIONS,
or,
PRINCIPLES
of the
LAW OF NATURE,
Applied to the Conduct and Affairs
OF NATIONS AND SOVEREIGNS.
from the french of monsieur de vattel.
Nihil est enim illi principi Deo qui omnem hunc mundum regit, quod
quidem in terris ﬁat, acceptius, quam concilia coetusque hominumjure
sociati, quae civitates, appellantur.1
Cicero, Som. Scip.2
a new edition,
Revised, corrected, and enriched with many valuable Notes never
before translated into English.
london:
printed for g. g. and j. robinson, paternoster-row.
1797.
1. “For to the Supreme God who governs this whole universe nothing is more
pleasing than those companies and unions of men that are called cities.”
2. Somnium Scipionis (Scipio’s Dream) in Cicero, De republica.




advertisement
In undertaking this new edition of Monsieur De Vattel’s treatise, it was
not my intention to give what might strictly be called a new translation.
To add the author’s valuable notes from the posthumous editionprinted
at Neuchatel in 1773,—to correct some errors I had observed in the for-
mer version,—and occasionally to amend the language where doubtful
or obscure,—were the utmost limits of my original plan. AsIproceeded,
however, my alterations became more numerous: but whether they will
be acknowledged as amendments, it must rest with the reader to deter-
mine. Even if his decision should be more favourable than I have any
reason to expect, I lay no claim to praise for my humble efforts, but shall
esteem myself very fortunate if I escape the severity of censure for pre-
senting the work to the public in a state still so far short of perfection.
Conscious of its defects, I declare with great sincerity—
. . . . Veniam pro laude peto,—laudatus abunde,
Non fastiditus si tibi, lector, ero.3
london,
the editor
May 1, 1797.
3. “I ask forgiveness not praise,—I will be praised in full, if you don’t despise me,
reader” (Ovid, Tristia I, VII).




5
chapter xiii
189
plaints are only formed with a view of protracting a suit, and procras-
tinating a just condemnation. A just and wise sovereign will not admit
them without great caution; and if he reverses the sentence that is com-
plained of, he ought not to try the cause himself, but submit it to the
examination of another tribunal, as is the practice in France. The ru-
inous length of <80> these proceedings authorises us to say, that it is
more convenient and advantageous to the state, to establish a sovereign
tribunal, whose deﬁnitive decrees should not be subject to areversaleven
by the prince himself. It is sufﬁcient for the security of justice, that the
sovereign keep a watchful eye over the judges and magistrates, in the
same manner as he is bound to watch all the other ofﬁcers in the state,—
and that he have power to call to an account and to punish such as are
guilty of prevarication.
When once this sovereign tribunal is established, the prince cannot
meddle with its decrees; and, in general, he is absolutely obliged to pre-
serve and maintain the forms of justice. Every attempt to violate them
is an assumption of arbitrary power, to which it cannot be presumed
that any nation could ever have intended to subject itself.
When those forms are defective, it is the business of the legislator to
reform them. This being done or procured in a manner agreeable to the
fundamental laws, will be one of the most salutary beneﬁtsthesovereign
can bestow upon his people. To preserve the citizens from the danger of
ruining themselves in defending their rights,—to repress and destroy
that monster, chicanery,—will be an action more glorious in the eyes of
the wise man, than all the exploits of a conqueror.
Justice is administered in the name of the sovereign; the prince relies
on the judgment of the courts, and, with good reason, looks upon their
decisions as sound law and justice. His part in this branch of the gov-
ernment is then to maintain the authority of the judges, and to cause
their sentences to be executed; without which, they would be vain and
delusive; for justice would not be rendered to the citizens.
There is another kind of justice named attributive or distributive,
which in general consists in treating every one according to his deserts.
This virtue ought to regulate the distribution of public employments,
honours, and rewards in a state. It is, in the ﬁrst place, a duty the nation
§166. The
prince ought
to preserve
the forms of
justice.
§167. The
prince ought
to support the
authority of
the judges.
§168. Of
distributive
justice.


190
book i: nations in themselves
owes to herself, to encourage good citizens, to excite every one to virtue
by honours and rewards, and to intrust with employments such persons
only as are capable of properly discharging them. In the next place, it is
a duty the nation owes to individuals, to shew herself duly attentive to
reward and honour merit. Although a sovereign has the power of dis-
tributing his favours and employments to whomsoever he pleases, and
nobody has a perfect right to any post or dignity,—yet a man who by
intense application has qualiﬁedhimself tobecomeusefultohiscountry,
and he who has rendered some signal service to the state, may justly
complain if the prince overlooks them, in order to advance useless men
without merit. This is treating them with an ingratitude that is wholly
unjustiﬁable, and adapted only to extinguish emulation. There is hardly
any fault that in a course of time can become more prejudicial to a state:
it introduces intoita generalrelaxation;anditspublicaffairs,beingman-
aged by incompetent hands, cannot fail to <81> be attended with ill-
success. A powerful state may support itself for some time by its own
weight; but at length it falls into decay; and this is perhaps one of the
principal causes of those revolutions observable in great empires. The
sovereign is attentive to the choice of those he employs, while he feels
himself obliged to watch over his own safety, and to be on his guard:
but when once he thinks himself elevated to such a pitch of greatness
and power as leaves him nothing to fear, he follows his own caprice, and
all public ofﬁces are distributed by favour.
The punishment of transgressors commonly belongs to distributive
justice, of which it is really a branch; since good order requires that mal-
efactors should be made to suffer the punishments they have deserved.
But if we would clearly establish this on its true foundations, we must
recur to ﬁrst principles. The right of punishing, which in a state of na-
ture belongs to each individual, is founded on the right of personal
safety. Every man has a right to preserve himself from injury, and by
force to provide for his own security, against those who unjustly attack
him. For this purpose, he may, when injured, inﬂict a punishment on
the aggressor, as well with the view of putting it out of his power to
injure him for the future, or of reforming him, as of restraining, by his
example, all those who might be tempted to imitate him. Now, when
The distri-
bution of
employments
and rewards.
§169. Punish-
ment of
transgressors.
Foundation of
the right of
punishing.


chapter xiii
191
men unite in society,—as the society is thenceforward charged with the
duty of providing for the safety of its members, the individualsallresign
to it their private right of punishing. To the whole body, therefore, it
belongs to avenge private injuries, while it protects the citizens at large.
And as it is a moral person, capable also of being injured, it has a right
to provide for its own safety, by punishing those who trespass against
it;—thatistosay,ithasarighttopunishpublicdelinquents.Hencearises
the right of the sword, which belongs to a nation, or to its conductor.
When the society use it against another nation, they make war; when
they exert it in punishing an individual, they exercise vindictive justice.
Two things are to be considered in this part of government,—the laws,
and their execution.
It would be dangerous to leave the punishment of transgressors en-
tirely to the discretion of those who are invested with authority. The
passions might interfere in a business which ought to be regulated only
by justice and wisdom. The punishment, pre-ordained foranevilaction,
lays a more effectual restraint on the wicked, than a vague fear, in which
they may deceive themselves. In short, the people, who are commonly
moved at the sight of a suffering wretch, are better convinced of the
justice of his punishment, when it is inﬂicted by the laws themselves.
Every well-governed state ought then to have its lawsforthepunishment
of criminals. It belongs to the legislative power, whatever that be, to
establish them with justice and wisdom. But this is not a proper place
for giving a general theory of them: we shall therefore only say, that each
nation ought, in this as in every <82> other instance, to chuse such laws
as may best suit her peculiar circumstances.
We shall only make one observation, which is connected with the
subject in hand, and relates to the degreeof punishment.Fromthefoun-
dation even of the right of punishing, and from the lawful end of in-
ﬂicting penalties, arises the necessity of keeping them within just
bounds. Since they are designed to procure the safety of the state and
of the citizens, they ought never to be extended beyond what that safety
requires. To say that any punishment is just since the transgressor knew
beforehand the penalty he was about to incur, is using a barbarous lan-
guage, repugnant to humanity, and to the law of nature, which forbids
§170. Crim-
inal laws.
§171. Degree
of punish-
ment.

192
book i: nations in themselves
our doing any ill to others, unless they lay us under the necessity of
inﬂicting it in our own defence and for our own security.Wheneverthen
a particular crime is not much to be feared in society, as when the op-
portunities of committing it are very rare, or when the subjects are not
inclined to it, too rigorous punishments ought not to be used tosuppress
it. Attention ought also to be paid to the nature of the crime; and the
punishment should be proportioned to the degree of injury done to the
public tranquillity and the safety of society, and the wickedness it sup-
poses in the criminal.
These maxims are not only dictated by justice and equity, but also as
forcibly recommended by prudence and the art of government. Expe-
rience shews us, that the imagination becomes familiarised to objects
which are frequently presented to it. If, therefore, terrible punishments
are multiplied, the people will become daily less affected by them, and
at length contract, like the Japanese, a savage and ferocious character:—
these bloody spectacles will then no longer produce the effect designed;
for they will cease to terrify the wicked. It is with these examples as with
honours:—a prince who multiplies titles and distinctions toexcess,soon
depreciates them, and makes an injudicious use of one of the mostpow-
erful and convenient springs of government. When we recollect the
practice of the ancient Romans with respect to criminals,—when we
reﬂect on their scrupulous attention to spare the blood of thecitizens,—
we cannot fail to be struck at seeing with how little ceremony it is now-
a-days shed in the generality of states. Was then the Roman republicbut
ill governed? Does better order and greater security reign among us?—
It is not so much the cruelty of the punishments, as a strict punctuality
in enforcing the penal code, that keeps mankind within the bounds of
duty: and if simple robbery is punished with death, what further pun-
ishment is reserved to check the hand of the murderer?
The execution of the laws belongs to the conductor of the state: he
is intrusted with the care of it, and is indispensably obliged to discharge
it with wisdom. The prince then is to see that the criminal laws be put
in execution; but he is not to attempt in his own person to try the guilty.
Besides the reasons <83> we have already alleged in treating of civil
causes, and which are of still greater weight in regard to those of a crim-
§172. Exe-
cution of
the laws.
chapter xiii
193
inal nature,—toappear in thecharacterof ajudgepronouncingsentence
on a wretched criminal, would ill become the majesty of the sovereign,
who ought in every thing to appear as the father of his people. It is a
very wise maxim commonly received in France, that the prince ought
to reserve to himself all matters of favour, and leave it to the magistrates
to execute the rigour of justice. But then justice ought to be exercised
in his name, and under his authority. A good prince will keep a watchful
eye over the conduct of the magistrates; he will oblige them to observe
scrupulously the established forms, and will himself take care never to
break through them. Every sovereign who neglects or violates the forms
of justice in the prosecution of criminals, makes large strides towards
tyranny: and the liberty of the citizens is at an end, when once they cease
to be certain that they cannot be condemned, except in pursuance of
the laws, according to the established forms, and by their ordinary
judges. The custom of committing the trial of the accused partytocom-
missioners chosen at the pleasure of the court, was the tyrannical in-
vention of some ministers who abused the authority of their master. By
this irregular and odious procedure, a famous minister always succeeded
in destroying his enemies. A good prince will never give his consent to
sucha proceeding,if hehassufﬁcientdiscernmenttoforeseethedreadful
abuse his ministers may make of it. If the prince ought not to pass sen-
tence himself,—for the same reason, he ought not to aggravate the sen-
tence passed by the judges.
The very nature of government requires that the executor of the laws
should have the power of dispensing with them, when this may be done
without injury to any person, and in certain particular cases where the
welfare of the state requires an exception. Hence the right of granting
pardons is one of the attributes of sovereignty. But, in his whole con-
duct, in his severity as well as in his mercy, the sovereign ought to have
no other object in view than the greater advantage of society. A wise
prince knows how to reconcile justice with clemency,—the care of the
public safety, with that pity which is due to the unfortunate.
The internal police consists in the attention of the prince and mag-
istrates to preserve every thing in order. Wise regulations ought to pre-
scribe whatever will best contribute to the public safety, utility and con-
§173. Right
of pardoning.
§174. Internal
police.


194
book i: nations in themselves
venience; and those who are invested with authority cannot be too
attentive to enforce them. By a wise police, the sovereign accustoms the
people to order and obedience, and preserves peace, tranquillity, and
concord among the citizens. The magistrates of Holland are said to pos-
sess extraordinary talents in this respect:—a better policeprevailsintheir
cities, and even their establishments in the Indies, than in any other
places in the known world. <84>
Laws and the authority of the magistrates having been substituted in
the room of private war, the conductor of a nation ought not to suffer
individuals to attempt to do themselves justice, when they can have re-
course to the magistrates. Duelling—that species of combat, in which
the parties engage on account of a private quarrel—is a manifest dis-
order, repugnant to the ends of civil society. This phrenzy was unknown
to the ancient Greeks and Romans, who raised to such a height the glory
of their arms: we received it from barbarous nations who knew no other
law but the sword. Louis XIV. deserves the greatest praise for his en-
deavours to abolish this savage custom.
But why was not that prince made sensible that the most severe pun-
ishments were incapable of curing the rage for duelling? They did not
reach the source of the evil; and since a ridiculous prejudice had per-
suaded all the nobility and gentlemen of the army, that a man whowears
a sword is bound inhonour toavenge,withhisownhand,theleastinjury
he has received; this is the principle on which it is proper to proceed.
We must destroy this prejudice, or restrain it by a motive of the same
nature. While a nobleman, by obeying the law, shall be regarded by his
equals as a coward and as a man dishonoured,—while an ofﬁcer in the
same case shall be forced to quit the service,—canyouhinderhisﬁghting
by threatening him with death? On the contrary, he will place a part of
his bravery in doubly exposing his life, in order to wash away the affront.
And certainly, while the prejudice subsists, while a nobleman or an of-
ﬁcer cannot act in opposition to it, without embittering the rest of his
life, I do not know whether we can justly punish him who is forced to
submit to its tyranny, or whether he be very guilty with respect to mo-
rality. That worldly honour, be it as false and chimerical as you please,
is to him a substantial and necessary possession, since without it, he can
§175. Duel, or
single combat.
§176. Means
of putting a
stop to this
disorder.


chapter xiii
195
neither live with his equals, nor exercise a profession that is oftenhisonly
resource. When therefore any insolent fellow would unjustlyravishfrom
him that chimera so esteemed and so necessary, why may he not defend
it as he would his life and property against a robber? As the state does
not permit an individual to pursue with arms in his hand the usurper
of his property, because he may obtain justice from the magistrate,—so,
if the sovereign will not allow him to draw his sword against the man
from whom he has received an insult, he ought necessarily to take such
measures that the patience and obedience of the citizen who has been
insulted, shall not prove prejudicial to him. Society cannot deprive man
of his natural right of making war against an aggressor, without fur-
nishing him with some other means of securing himself from the evil
his enemy would do him. On all those occasions where the public au-
thority cannot lend us its assistance, we resume our original and natural
right of self-defence. Thus a traveller may, without hesitation, kill the
robber who attacks him on the highway; <85> because it would, at that
moment, be in vain for him to implore the protection of the laws and
of the magistrate. Thus a chaste virgin would be praised for taking away
the life of a brutal ravisher who attempted to force her to his desires.
Till men have got rid of this Gothic idea, that honour obliges them,
even in contempt of the laws, to avenge their personal injurieswiththeir
own hands, the most effectual method of putting a stop to the effects
of this prejudice would perhaps be to make a total distinction between
the offended and the aggressor,—to pardon the former without difﬁ-
culty, when it appears that his honour has been really attacked,—and to
exercise justice without mercy on the party who has committed the out-
rage. And as to those who draw the sword for triﬂes and punctilios, for
little piques or railleries in which honour is not concerned, I would have
them severely punished. By this means a restraint would be put on those
peevish and insolent folks, who often reduce even the most moderate
men to a necessity of chastising them. Every one would be on his guard,
to avoid being considered as the aggressor; and with a view to gain the
advantage of engaging in duel (if unavoidable) without incurring the
penalties of the law, both parties would curb their passions; by which
means the quarrel would fall of itself, and be attended with no conse-


196
book i: nations in themselves
quences. It frequently happens that a bully is at bottom a coward; he
gives himself haughty airs, and offers insult, in hopes that the rigour of
the law will oblige people to put up with his insolence. And what is the
consequence?—A man of spirit will run every risk, rather than submit
to be insulted:—the aggressor dares not recede: and a combat ensues,
which would not have taken place, if thelattercouldhaveonceimagined
that there was nothing to prevent the other from chastising him for his
presumption,—the offended person being acquitted by the same law
that condemns the aggressor.
To this ﬁrst law, whose efﬁcacy would, I doubt not, be soon proved
by experience, it would be proper to add the following regulations:—1.
Since it is an established custom that the nobility and military men
should appear armed even in time of peace, care should be taken to
enforce a rigid observance of the laws which allow the privilege of wear-
ing swords to these two orders of men only. 2. It would be proper to
establish a particular court, to determine, in a summary manner, all af-
fairs of honourbetweenpersonsof thesetwoorders.Themarshals’court
in France is in possession of this power; and it might be invested with
it in a more formal manner and to a greater extent. The governors of
provinces and strong places, with their general ofﬁcers,—the colonels
and captains of each regiment,—might, inthis particular,actasdeputies
to the marshals. These courts, each in its own department, should alone
confer the right of wearing a sword. Every nobleman at sixteen or eigh-
teen years of age, and every soldier at his entrance into the regiment,
should be obliged to appear before the court to receive <86> the sword.
3. On its being there delivered to him, he should be informed, that it is
intrusted to him only for the defence of his country; and care might be
taken to inspire him with true ideas of honour. 4. It appears to me of
great importance, to establish, for different cases, punishments of a dif-
ferent nature. Whoever should so far forget himself, as, either by word
or deed, to insult a man who wears a sword, might be degraded from
the rank of nobility, deprived of the privilege of carrying arms, and sub-
jected to corporal punishment,—even the punishment of death, ac-
cording tothegrossnessof theinsult:and,asIbeforeobserved,nofavour
should be shewn to the offender in case a duel was the consequence,


chapter xiii
197
while at the same time the other party should stand fully acquitted.
Those who ﬁght on slight occasions, I would not have condemned to
death, unless in such cases where the author of the quarrel,—he, Imean,
who carried it so far as to draw his sword, or to give the challenge,—has
killed his adversary. People hope to escape punishment, when it is too
severe; and, besides, a capital punishment, in such cases, is not consid-
ered as infamous. But let them be ignominiously degradedfromtherank
of nobility and the use of arms, and for ever deprived of the right of
wearing a sword, without the least hope of pardon: this would be the
most proper method to restrain men of spirit, provided that due care
was taken to make a distinction between different offenders, according
to the degree of the offence. As to persons below the rank of nobility,
and who do not belong to the army, their quarrels should be left to the
cognisance of the ordinary courts, which, in case of bloodshed, should
punish the offenders according to the common laws againstviolenceand
murder. It should be the same with respect to any quarrel that might
arise between a commoner and a man entitled to carry arms: it is the
business of the ordinary magistrate to preserve order and peace between
those two classes of men, who cannot have any points of honour to
settle, the one with the other. To protect the people against the violence
of those who wear the sword, and to punish the former severely, if they
should dare to insult the latter, should further be, as it is at present, the
business of the magistrate.
I am sanguine enough to believe that these regulations, and this
method of proceeding, if strictly adhered to, would extirpate that mon-
ster, duelling, which the most severe laws have been unable to restrain.
They go to the source of the evil by preventing quarrels, and oppose a
lively sensation of true and real honour to that false and punctilious
honour which occasions the spilling of so much blood. It would be wor-
thy a great monarch to make a trial of it: its success would immortalise
his name; and by the bare attempt he would merit the love and gratitude
of his people. <87>

198
book i: nations in themselves
chapter xiv
The third Object of a good Government,—to fortify
itself against external Attacks.
We have treated at large of what relates to the felicity of a nation: the
subject is equally copious and complicated. Letus nowproceedtoathird
division of the duties which a nation owes to itself,—a third object of
good government. One of the ends of political society is to defend itself
with its combined strength against all external insult or violence (§15).
If the society is not in a condition to repulse an aggressor, it is very im-
perfect,—it is unequal to the principal object of its destination,andcan-
not long subsist. The nation ought to put itself in such a state as to be
able to repel and humble an unjust enemy: this is an important duty,
which the care of its own perfection, and even of its preservation, im-
poses both on the state and its conductor.
It is its strength alone that can enable a nationtorepulseallaggressors,
to secure its rights, and render itself every where respectable. It is called
upon by every possible motive, to neglect no circumstance that can tend
to place it in this happy situation. The strength of a state consists in
three things,—the number of the citizens, their military virtues, and
their riches. Under this last article we may comprehend fortresses, ar-
tillery, arms, horses, ammunition, and, in general, all that immense ap-
paratus at present necessary in war, since they can all be procured with
money.
To increase the number of the citizens as far as it is possible or con-
venient, is then one of the ﬁrst objects that claim the attentive care of
the state or its conductor: and this will be successfully effected by com-
plying with the obligation to procure the country a plenty of the nec-
essaries of life,—by enabling the people to support their families with
the fruits of their labour,—by giving proper directions that the poorer
classes, and especially the husbandmen, be not harassed and oppressed
by the levying of taxes,—by governing with mildness, and in a manner,
which, instead of disgusting and dispersing the present subjects of the
§177. A nation
ought to fortify
itself against
external
attacks.
§178. National
strength.
§179. Increase
of population.


chapter xiv
199
state, shall rather attract new ones,—and, ﬁnally, by encouraging mar-
riage, after the example of theRomans. Thatnation,soattentivetoevery
thing capable of increasing and supporting their power, made wise laws
against celibacy (as we have already observed in §149), and grantedprivi-
leges and exemptions to married men, particularly to those who had
numerous families: laws that were equally wise and just, since a citizen
who rears <88> subjects for the state, has a right to expect more favour
from it than the man who chuses to live for himself alone.*
Every thing tending to depopulate a country is a defect in a state not
overstocked with inhabitants. We have already spoken of convents and
the celibacy of priests. It is strange that establishments, so directly re-
pugnant to the duties of a man and a citizen, as well as to the advantage
and safety of society, should have found such favour, and that princes,
instead of opposing them as it was their duty to do, should have pro-
tected and enriched them. A system of policy, that dextrously took ad-
vantage of superstition to extend its own power, led princes and subjects
astray, caused them to mistake their real duties, and blinded sovereigns
even with respect to their own interest. Experience seems at length to
have opened the eyes of nations and their conductors; the pope himself
(let us mention it to the honour of Benedict XIV.) endeavoursgradually
to reform so palpable an abuse; by his orders, none in his dominions are
any longer permitted to take the vow of celibacy before they are twenty-
* It is impossible to suppress the emotions of indignation that arise on reading
what some of the fathers of the church have written against marriage and in favour
of celibacy. “Videtur esse matrimonii et stupri differentia (says Tertullian): sed utro-
bique est communicatio.† Ergo, inquis, et primas nuptios damnas? Nec immerito,
quoniam et ipsae constant ex eo quod est stuprum.” [[Tertullian: “There is a dif-
ference between marriage and fornication, but in both cases there is intercommu-
nication [deﬁlement]. . . . Are you saying, then, that you condemn ﬁrst marriages as
well? Yes, and not without reason, because these too are composed of what is essen-
tially fornication” (trans. Eds.).]] Exhort. Castit. [[PL 2, 925]]—And thus Je-
rome: “Hanc tantum esse differentiam inter uxorem et scortum, quod tolerabiliussit
uni esse prostitutam quam pluribus.” [[“This is the only difference between a wife
and a strumpet, that it is more endurable to be prostituted to one than to many”
(trans. Eds.).]] [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
† Contaminatio? Edit.


200
book i: nations in themselves
ﬁve years of age. That wise pontiff gives the sovereigns of his com-
munion a salutary example; he invites them to attend at length to the
safety of their states,—to narrow at least, if they cannot entirely close
up, the avenues of that sink that drains their dominions. Take a view of
Germany; and there, in countries which are in all other respects upon
an equal footing, you will see the protestant states twice as populous as
the catholic ones. Compare the desert state of Spain with that of En-
gland teeming with inhabitants:—survey many ﬁne provinces, even in
France, destitute of hands to till the soil;—and then tell me, whether
the many thousands of both sexes, who are now locked up in convents,
would not serve God and their country inﬁnitely better, by peopling
those fertile plains with useful cultivators? It is true, indeed, that the
catholic cantons of Switzerland are nevertheless very populous: but this
is owing to a profound peace, and the nature of the government, which
abundantly repair the losses occasioned by convents. Liberty is able to
remedy thegreatestevils;itisthesoulof astate,andwaswithgreatjustice
called by the Romans alma Libertas.
A cowardly and undisciplined multitude are incapable of repulsing a
warlike enemy: the strength of the state consists less in the number than
the military virtues of its citizens. Valour, thatheroicvirtuewhichmakes
us undauntedly encounter danger <89> in defence of our country, is the
ﬁrmest support of the state: it renders it formidable to its enemies, and
often even saves it the trouble of defending itself. A state whose repu-
tation in this respect is once well established, will be seldom attacked, if
itdoesnotprovokeotherstatesbyitsenterprises.Forabovetwocenturies
the Swiss have enjoyed a profound peace, while the din of arms re-
sounded all around them, and the rest of Europe was desolated by the
ravages of war. Nature gives the foundation of valour; butvariouscauses
may animate it, weaken it, and even destroy it. A nation ought then to
seek after and cultivate a virtue so useful; and a prudent sovereign will
take all possible measures to inspire his subjects with it:—his wisdom
will point out to him the means. It is this generous ﬂame that animates
the French nobility: ﬁred with a love of glory and of their country, they
ﬂy to battle, and cheerfully spill their blood in the ﬁeld of honour. To
what an extent would they not carry their conquests, if that kingdom
§180. Valour.


chapter xiv
201
were surrounded by nations less warlike! The Briton, generous and in-
trepid, resembles a lion in combat; and in general, the nations of Europe
surpass in bravery all the other people upon earth.
But valour alone is not always successful in war: constant success can
only be obtained by an assemblage of all the military virtues. History
shews us the importance of ability in the commanders, of military dis-
cipline, frugality, bodily strength, dexterity, and being inured to fatigue
and labour. These are so many distinct branches which a nation ought
carefully to cultivate. It was the assemblage of all these that raised so
high the glory of the Romans, and rendered them the masters of the
world. It were a mistake to suppose that valour alone produced those
illustrious exploits of the ancient Swiss,—the victories of Morgarten,
Sempach, Laupen, Morat, and many others.64 TheSwissnotonlyfought
with intrepidity: they studied the art of war,—they inured themselves
to its toils, they accustomed themselves to the practice of all its ma-
noeuvres,—and their very love of liberty made them submit to a dis-
cipline which could alone secure to them that treasure, and save their
country. Their troops were no less celebrated for their discipline than
their bravery. Mezeray, after having given an account of the behaviour
of the Swiss at the battle of Dreux,65 adds these remarkable words: “in
the opinion of all the ofﬁcers of both sides who were present, the Swiss,
in that battle, under every trial, against infantry and cavalry, against
French and against Germans, gained the palm for military discipline,
and acquired the reputation of being the best infantry in the world.”*
Finally, the wealth of a nation constitutes a considerable part of its
power, especially in modern times, when war requires such immense
expenses. It is not simply in the revenues of the sovereign, or the public
treasure, that the riches of a nation <90> consist: its opulence is also
rated from the wealth of individuals. We commonly call a nation rich,
when it contains a great number of citizens in easy and afﬂuent circum-
stances. The wealth of private persons really increases the strength of
* History of France, Vol. II. p. 888.
64. Morgarten, 1315; Sempach, 1386; Laupen, 1339; Morat, 1476.
65. Battle of Dreux, 1562.
§181. Other
military
virtues.
§182. Riches.


202
book i: nations in themselves
the nation; since they are capable of contributing large sums towards
supplying the necessities of the state, and that, in a case of extremity,
the sovereign may even employ all the riches of his subjects in the de-
fence, and for the safety of the state, in virtue of the supreme command
with which he is invested, as we shall hereafter shew. The nation then
ought to endeavour to acquire those public and private riches, that are
of such use to it: and this is a new reason for encouraging a commerce
with other nations, which is the source from whence they ﬂow,—and a
new motive for the sovereign to keep a watchful eye over the different
branches of foreign trade carried on by his subjects, in order that he may
preserve and protect the proﬁtable branches, and cut off those that oc-
casion the exportation of gold and silver.
It is requisite that the state should possess an income proportionate
to its necessary expenditures. That income may be supplied by various
means,—by lands reserved for that purpose, by contributions, taxes of
different kinds, &c.—but of this subject we shall treat in another place.
We have here summed up the principal ingredients that constitute
that strength which a nation ought to augment and improve.—Can it
be necessary to add the observation, that this desirable object is not to
be pursued by any other methods than such as are just and innocent? A
laudable end is not sufﬁcient to sanctify the means; for these ought to
be in their own nature lawful. The law of nature cannotcontradictitself:
if it forbids an action as unjust or dishonest in its own nature, it can
never permit it for any purpose whatever. And therefore in those cases
where that object, in itself so valuable and so praiseworthy, cannot be
attained without employing unlawful means, it ought to be considered
as unattainable, and consequently be relinquished. Thus we shall shew,
in treating of the just causes of war, that a nation is not allowed toattack
another with a view to aggrandise itself by subduing and giving law to
the latter. This is just the same as if a private person should attempt to
enrich himself by seizing his neighbour’s property.
The power of a nation is relative, and ought to be measured by that
of its neighbours, or of all the nations from whom it has any thing to
fear. The state is sufﬁciently powerful, when it is capableof causingitself
to be respected, and of repelling whoever would attack it. It may be
§183. Public
revenues, and
taxes.
§184. The
nation ought
not to increase
its power by
illegal means.
§185. Power is
but relative.


chapter xv
203
placed in this happy situation, either by keeping up its own strength
equal or even superior to that of its neighbours,—or by preventingtheir
rising to a predominantand formidablepower.Butwecannotshewhere,
in what cases, and by what means, a state may justly set bounds to the
power of another: it is necessary ﬁrst to explain the duties <91> of a
nation towards others, in order to combine them afterwards with its du-
ties towards itself. For the present we shall only observe that a nation,
while it obeys the dictates of prudence and wise policy in this instance,
ought never to lose sight of the maxims of justice.
chapter xv
Of the Glory of a Nation.
The glory of a nation is intimately connected with its power, andindeed
forms a considerable part of it. It is this brilliant advantage thatprocures
it the esteem of other nations, and renders it respectable to its neigh-
bours. A nation whose reputation is well established,—especially one
whose glory is illustrious,—is courted by all sovereigns: they desire its
friendship, and are afraid of offending it. Its friends, and thosewhowish
to become so, favour its enterprises, and those who envy its prosperity
are afraid to shew their ill-will.
It is then of great advantage to a nation to establish its reputationand
glory: hence this becomes one of the most important of the duties it
owes to itself. True glory consists in the favourable opinion of men of
wisdom and discernment: it is acquired by the virtues or good qualities
of the head and the heart, and by great actions which are the fruits of
those virtues. A nation may have a two-fold claim to it—ﬁrst, by what
it does in its national character, by the conduct of those who have the
administration of its affairs, and are invested with its authority and gov-
ernment,—and, secondly, by the merit of the individuals of whom the
nation is composed.
A prince, a sovereign of whatever kind, being bound to exert every
effort for the good of the nation, is doubtless obliged to extend its glory,
§186. Advan-
tages of glory.
§187. Duty of
the nation.
How true
glory is
acquired.
§188. Duty of
the prince.

204
book i: nations in themselves
as far as lies in his power. We have seen that his duty is to labour after
the perfection of the state, and of the people who are subject to him: by
that means he will make them merit a good reputation and glory. He
ought always to have this object in view in every thing he undertakes,
and in the use he makes of his power. Let him, in all his actions, display
justice, moderation, and greatness of soul: and he will thus acquire for
himself and his people a name respected by the universe, and not less
useful than glorious. The glory of Henry IV.66 saved France: in the de-
plorable state in which he found affairs, his virtues gave animation to
the loyal part of his subjects, and encouraged foreign nations to lend
him their assistance, and to enter into an alliance with him against the
ambitious Spaniards. In his circumstances, a weak prince of little esti-
mation would have been abandoned by all the world; people wouldhave
been afraid of being involved in his ruin. <92>
Besides the virtues which constitute the glory of princes as well as of
private persons, there is a dignity and decorum that particularly belong
to the supreme rank, and which a sovereign ought to observe with the
greatest care. He cannot neglect them without degrading himself, and
casting a stain upon the state. Every thing that emanates from thethrone
ought to bear the character of purity, nobleness, and greatness. What an
idea do we conceive of a people, when we see their sovereign display in
his public acts a meanness of sentiment,bywhichaprivatepersonwould
think himself disgraced! All the majesty of the nation resides in the per-
son of the prince:—what then must become of it if he prostitutes it, or
suffers it to be prostituted by those who speak and act in his name? The
minister who puts into his master’s mouth a language unworthy of him,
deserves to be turned out of ofﬁce with every mark of ignominy.
The reputation of individuals is, by a common and natural mode of
speaking and thinking, made to reﬂect on the whole nation. In general
we attribute a virtue or a vice to a people, when that vice or that virtue
is frequentlyobservedamongthem.Wesaythatanationiswarlike,when
it produces a great number of brave warriors,—that it is learned, when
there are many learned men among the citizens,—and that it excels in
66. King Henry IV of France, r. 1589–1610.
§189. Duty of
the citizens.


chapter xv
205
the arts, when it produces many able artists: on the other hand, we call
it cowardly, lazy or stupid, when men of those characters are more nu-
merous there than elsewhere. The citizens, being obliged to labour with
all their might to promote the welfare and advantage of their country,
not only owe to themselves the care of deserving a good reputation, but
they also owe it to the nation, whose glory is so liable to be inﬂuenced
by theirs. Bacon, Newton, Descartes, Leibnitz, and Bernouilli,67 have
each done honour to his native country, and essentially beneﬁted it by
the glory he acquired. Great ministers, and great generals,—an Oxen-
stiern,68 a Turenne,69 a Marlborough,70 a Ruyter,71—serve their country
in a double capacity, both by their actions, and by their glory. On the
other hand, the fear of reﬂecting a disgrace on his country will furnish
the good citizen with a new motive for abstaining from every dishon-
ourable action. And the prince ought not to suffer his subjects to give
themselves up to vices capable of bringing infamy on the nation, oreven
of simply tarnishing the brightness of its glory:—he has a right to sup-
press and to punish scandalous enormities, which do a real injury to the
state.
The example of the Swiss is very capable of shewing how advanta-
geous glory may prove to a nation. The high reputation they have ac-
quired for their valour, and which they still gloriously support, has pre-
served theminpeaceforabovetwocenturies,andrenderedallthepowers
of Europe desirous of their assistance. Louis XI. while dauphin, was
witness of the prodigies of valour they performed at the battle of St.
Jaques,72 near <93> Basle, and he immediately formed the design of
closely attachingtohisinterestsointrepidanation.*Thetwelvehundred
* See the Memoirs of Commines.
67. Jacob Bernouilli, 1654–1705, Swiss mathematician and natural philosopher.
68. Axel Oxenstierna, 1588–1654, lord high chancellor of Sweden.
69. Henri de la Tour d’Auvergne, Vicomte de Turenne, 1611–75, military com-
mander and marshal of France.
70. John Churchill, ﬁrst duke of Marlborough, 1650–1712, military commander
serving William of Orange and Queen Anne.
71. Michiel de Ruyter, 1607–76, victorious Dutch admiral in the Anglo-Dutch
wars.
72. Louis XI of France, r. 1461–83; battle of St. Jacques, August 26, 1444.
§190. Example
of the Swiss.


206
book i: nations in themselves
gallant heroes, who on this occasion attacked an army of between ﬁfty
and sixty thousand veteran troops, ﬁrst defeated the vanguard of the
Armagnacs, which was eighteen thousand strong; afterwards rashly en-
gaging the main body of the army, they perished almost to a man, with-
out being able to complete their victory.* But besides their terrifyingthe
enemy, and preserving Switzerland from a ruinous invasion, they ren-
dered her essential service by the glory they acquired for her arms. A
reputationforaninviolableﬁdelityisnolessadvantageoustothatnation;
and they have at all times been jealous of preserving it. The canton of
Zug punished with death that unworthy soldier who betrayed the con-
ﬁdence of the duke of Milan by discovering that prince to the French,
when, to escape them, he had disguised himself in the habit of the Swiss
and placed himself in their ranks as they were marching out of Novara.†
Since the glory of a nation is a real and substantial advantage, she has
a right to defend it, as well as her other advantages. He who attacks her
glory does her an injury; and she has a right to exact of him, even by
force of arms, a just reparation. We cannot then condemn those mea-
sures sometimes taken by sovereigns to support or avenge the dignity of
their crown. They are equally just and necessary. If, when they do not
proceed from too lofty pretensions, we attribute them to a vain pride,
we only betray the grossest ignorance of the art of reigning, and despise
one of the ﬁrmest supports of the greatness and safety of a state.
* Of this small army, “eleven hundred and ﬁfty-eight were counted dead on the
ﬁeld, and thirty-two wounded. Twelve men only escaped, who were considered by
their countrymen as cowards, that had preferred a life of shame to the honour of
dying for their country.” History of the Helvetic Confederacy, by M. de Watteville, Vol.
1. p. 250.—Tschudi, p. 425.
† Vogel’s Historical and Political Treatise of the Alliances between France andthe
Thirteen Cantons, pag. 75, 76.
§191.
Attacking the
glory of a
nation is doing
her an injury.


chapter xvi
207
chapter xvi
Of the Protection sought by a Nation, and its
voluntary Submission to a foreign Power.
When a nation is not capable of preserving herself from insult and op-
pression, she may procure the protection of a more powerful state. If
she obtains this by only engaging to perform certain articles, as, to pay
a tribute in return for the safety obtained,—tofurnishherprotectorwith
troops,—and to embark in all his wars as a joint concern,—but still re-
servingtoherself therightof administeringherowngovernmentatplea-
sure,—it is a <94> simple treaty of protection, that does not at all der-
ogate from her sovereignty, and differs not from the ordinary treaties of
alliance otherwise than as it creates a difference in the dignity of the
contracting parties.
But this matter is sometimes carried still farther: and although a na-
tion is under an obligation to preserve with the utmost care the liberty
and independence it inherits from nature,—yet, when it has not sufﬁ-
cient strength of itself, and feels itself unable to resist its enemies, it may
lawfully subject itself to a more powerful nation on certain conditions
agreed to by both parties: and the compact or treaty of submission will
thenceforward be the measure and rule of the rights of each. For since
the people who enter into subjection resign a right which naturally be-
longs to them, and transfer it to the other nation, they are perfectly at
liberty to annex what conditions they please to this transfer; and the
other party, by accepting their submission on this footing, engages to
observe religiously all the clauses of the treaty.
This submission may be varied to inﬁnity, according to the will of
the contracting parties: it may either leave the inferior nation a part of
the sovereignty, restraining it only in certain respects,—or it may totally
abolish it, so that the superior nation shall become the sovereign of the
other,—or, ﬁnally, the lesser nation may be incorporated with the
greater, in order thenceforward to form with it but one and the same
state: and then the citizens of the former will have the same privileges
§192.
Protection.
§193. Volun-
tary submis-
sion of one
nation to
another.
§194. Several
kinds of
submission.


208
book i: nations in themselves
as those with whom they are united. The Roman history furnishes ex-
amples of each of these three kinds of submission,—1. the allies of the
Roman people, such as the inhabitants of Latium were for a long time,
who, in several respects, depended on Rome, but, in all others, were
governed according to their own laws, and by their own magistrates;—
2. the countries reduced to Roman provinces, as Capua, whose inhab-
itants submitted absolutely to the Romans;*—3. the nations to which
Rome granted the freedom of the city. In after times the emperors
granted that privilege to all the nations subject to the empire, and thus
transformed all their subjects into citizens.
In the case of a real subjection to a foreign power, the citizens who
do not approve this change are not obliged to submit to it:—they ought
to be allowed to sell their effects and retire elsewhere. For my having
entered into a society does not oblige me to follow its fate, when it dis-
solves itself in order to submit to a foreign dominion. I submitted to the
society as it then was, to live in that society as the member of a sovereign
state, and not in another: I am bound to obey it, while it remains a po-
litical society: but when it divests itself of that quality in order to re-
<95>ceive its laws from another state, it breaks the bond of union be-
tween its members, and releases them from their obligations.
When a nation has placed itself under the protection of another that
is more powerful, or has even entered into subjection to it with a view
to receiving its protection,—if the latter does not effectually protect the
other in case of need, it is manifest, that, by failing in its engagements,
itloses allthe rightsithadacquiredbytheconvention,andthattheother,
being disengaged from the obligation it had contracted, re-enters into
the possession of all its rights, and recovers its independence, or its lib-
erty. It is to be observed, that this takes place even in cases where the
protector does not fail in his engagements through a want of good faith,
* Itaque populum Campanum, urbemque Capuam, agros, delubra deuˆm, divina
humanaque omnia, in vestram, patres conscripti, populique Romani ditionem de-
dimus. [[“Therefore we now place under your sway and jurisdiction, senators, and
that of the Roman people, the people of Campania and the city of Capua, its ﬁelds,
its sacred temples, all things human and divine.”]] LIVY, book vii. c. 31. [[Ab urbe
condita, VII, 31.]]
§195. Right of
the citizens
when the
nation submits
to a foreign
power.
§196. These
compacts
annulled by
the failure of
protection.


chapter xvi
209
but merely through inability. For the weaker nation having submitted
only for the sake of obtaining protection,—if the other proves unable
to fulﬁl that essential condition, the compact is dissolved;—the weaker
resumes its right, and may, if it thinks proper, have recourse to a more
effectual protection.* Thus the dukes of Austria, who had acquired a
right of protection, and in some sort a sovereignty over the city of Lu-
cerne, being unwilling or unable to protect it effectually, that city con-
cluded an alliance with the three ﬁrst cantons; and the dukes having
carried their complaint to the emperor, the inhabitants of Lucerne re-
plied, “that they had used the naturalrightcommontoallmen,bywhich
every one is permitted to endeavour to procure his own safety when he
is abandoned by those who are obliged to grant him assistance.”†
The law is the same with respect to both the contracting parties: if
the party protected do not fulﬁl their engagements with ﬁdelity, thepro-
tector is discharged from his; he may afterwards refuse his protection,
and declare the treaty broken, in case the situation of his affairs renders
such a step advisable.
In virtue of the same principle which discharges one of the contract-
ing parties when the other fails in his engagements, if the morepowerful
nation should assume a greater authority over the weaker one than the
treaty of protection or submission allows, the latter may consider the
treaty as broken, and provide for its safety according to its own discre-
tion. If it were otherwise, the inferior nation would lose by a convention
which it had only formed with a view to its safety; and if it were still
bound by its engagements when its protector abuses them and openly
violates his own, thetreaty would,totheweakerparty,proveadownright
* We speak here of a nation that has rendered itself subject to another, and not
of one that has incorporated itself with another state, so as to constitute a part of it.
The latter stands in the same predicament with all the other citizens. Of this case we
shall treat in the following chapter.
† See [[Watteville]] The History of Switzerland [[the ﬁrst edition is titled Les
historiens de la Suisse]].—The United Provinces, having been obliged to rely wholly
on their own efforts in defending themselves against Spain, would no longer ac-
knowledge any dependence on the empire, from which they had received no assis-
tance. GROTIUS, Hist. of the Troubles in the Low Countries, B. xvi. p. 627. [[Note
added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§197. Or by
the inﬁdelity
of the party
protected.
§198. And by
the encroach-
ments of the
protector.

210
book i: nations in themselves
deception. However, as some people maintain, that, <96> in this case,
the inferior nation has only the right of resistance and of imploring for-
eign aid,—and particularly as the weak cannot take too many precau-
tions against the powerful, who are skilful in colouring over their en-
terprises,—the safest way is to insert in this kind of treaty a clause
declaring it null and void whenever the superior power shall arrogate to
itself any rights not expressly granted by the treaty.
But if the nation that is protected, or that has placed itself in sub-
jection on certain conditions, does not resist the encroachments of that
power from which it has sought support,—if it makes no opposition to
them,—if it preserves a profound silence, when it might and ought to
speak,—its patient acquiescence becomes in length of time a tacit con-
sent that legitimates the rights of the usurper. There would be no sta-
bility in the affairs of men, and especially in those of nations, if long
possession, accompanied by the silence of the persons concerned, did
not produce a degree of right. But it must be observed, that silence, in
order to shew tacit consent, ought to be voluntary. If the inferior nation
proves that violence and fear prevented its giving testimonies of its op-
position, nothing can be concluded from its silence, which therefore
gives no right to the usurper.
chapter xvii
How a Nation may separate itself from the State of
which it is a Member, or renounce its Allegiance to its
Sovereign when it is not protected.
We have said that an independent nation, which, without becoming a
member of another state, has voluntarily rendered itself dependent on
or subject to it in order to obtain protection, is released from its en-
gagements as soon as that protection fails, even though the failure hap-
pen through the inability of the protector. But we are not to conclude
that it is precisely the same case with every nation that cannot obtain
speedy and effectual protection from its natural sovereign or the state of
which it is a member. The two cases are very different. In the former, a
§199. How the
right of the
nation pro-
tected is lost
by its silence.
§200. Differ-
ence between
the present
case and
those in the
preceding
chapter.


chapter xvii
211
free nation becomes subject to another state,—not to partake of all the
other’s advantages, and form with it an absolute union of interests (for
if the more powerful state were willing to confer so great a favour, the
weaker one would be incorporated, not subjected),—but to obtain pro-
tection alone by the sacriﬁce of its liberty, without expecting any other
return. When therefore the sole and indispensable condition of its sub-
jection is (from what cause soever) not complied with, it is free from its
engagements; and its duty towards itself obliges it to take fresh methods
toprovideforitsownsecurity.Buttheseveralmembersof oneindividual
state, as they all equally participate in the advantages it procures, are
bound uniformly to sup-<97>port it: they have entered into mutual en-
gagements to continue united with each other, and to have on all oc-
casions but one common cause. If those who are menaced or attacked
might separate themselves from the others in order to avoid a present
danger, every state would soon be dismembered and destroyed. It is then
essentially necessary for the safety of society, and even for the welfare of
all its members, that each part should with all its might resist a common
enemy, rather than separate from the others; and this is consequently
one of the necessary conditions of the political association. The natural
subjects of a prince are bound to him without any other reserve than
the observation of the fundamental laws;—it is their duty to remain
faithful to him, as it is his, on the other hand, to take care to governthem
well: both parties have but one common interest; the people and the
prince together constitute but one complete whole, one and the same
society. It is then an essential and necessary condition of the political
society, that the subjects remain united to their prince, as far as in their
power.
When, therefore, a city or a province is threatened or actually at-
tacked, it must not, for the sake of escaping the danger, separate itself
from the state of which it is a member, or abandon its natural prince,
even when the state or the prince is unable to give it immediate and
effectual assistance. Its duty, its political engagements, oblige it to make
the greatest efforts, in order to maintain itself in its present state. If it is
overcome by force,—necessity, that irresistible law, frees it from its for-
merengagements,andgivesitarighttotreatwiththeconqueror,inorder
to obtain the best terms possible. If it must either submit to him or
§201. Duty of
the members
of a state, or
subjects of a
prince, who
are in danger.


212
book i: nations in themselves
perish, who can doubt but that it may and even ought to prefer the for-
mer alternative? Modern usage is conformable to this decision:—a city
submits to the enemy when it cannot expect safety from a vigorous re-
sistance; it takes an oath of ﬁdelity to him; and its sovereign lays the
blame on fortune alone.
The state is obliged to defend and preserve all its members (§17); and
the prince owes the same assistance to his subjects. If, therefore, thestate
or the prince refuses or neglects to succour a body of people who are
exposed to imminent danger, the latter, being thus abandoned, become
perfectly free toprovidefortheirownsafetyandpreservationinwhatever
manner they ﬁnd most convenient, without paying the least regard to
those who, by abandoning them, have been the ﬁrst to fail in their duty.
The country of Zug, being attacked by the Swiss in 1352, sentforsuccour
to the duke of Austria its sovereign; but that prince, being engaged in
discourse concerning his hawks at the time when the deputies appeared
before him, would scarcely condescend to hear them. Thus abandoned,
the people of Zug entered into the Helvetic confederacy.* The city of
Zurich <98> had been in the same situation the year before. Being at-
tacked by a band of rebellious citizens who were supported by theneigh-
bouring nobility and the house of Austria, it made application to the
head of the empire: but Charles IV.73 who was then emperor, declared
to its deputies that he could not defend it;—uponwhich,Zurichsecured
its safety by an alliance with the Swiss.† The same reason has authorised
the Swiss in general to separate themselves entirely from the empire,
which never protected them in any emergency: they had not owned its
authority for a long time before their independence was acknowledged
by the emperor and the wholeGermanicbody,atthetreatyof Westphalia.
* See Etterlin, Simler, and de Watteville.
† See the same historians, and Bullinger, Stumpf, Tschudi, and Stettler.
73. Bullinger discusses the events Vattel refers to at Zurich, including the role of
Charles IV (r. 1355–78), in his famous Chronicle of Zurich(“Tigurinerchronik,”pt. 1,
bk. 8, chap. 5). Never published, the Chronicle was available only in several manu-
script copies (see Zentralbibliothek Zu¨rich, Ms. Car 43 and 44; for the relevant pas-
sage see Car 43, p. 371r–374v). Vattel may well have had access to the Chronicle,
although there is no evidence to support such a claim.
§202. Their
right when
they are
abandoned.


chapter xviii
213
chapter xviii
Of the Establishment of a Nation in a Country.
Hitherto we have considered the nation merely with respect to itself,
without any regard to the country it possesses. Let us now see it estab-
lished in a country, which becomes its own property and habitation.
The earth belongs to mankind in general; destined by the creator to be
their common habitation, and to supply them with food, they all pos-
sess a natural right to inhabit it, and to derive from it whatever is nec-
essary for their subsistence, and suitable to their wants. But when the
human race became extremely multiplied, the earth was no longer ca-
pable of furnishing spontaneously, and without culture, sufﬁcientsup-
port for its inhabitants; neither could it have received proper cultiva-
tion from wandering tribes of men continuingtopossessitincommon.
It therefore became necessary that those tribes should ﬁx themselves
somewhere, and appropriate to themselves portions of land, in order
that they might, without being disturbed in their labour, or disap-
pointed of the fruits of their industry, apply themselves to renderthose
lands fertile, and thence derive their subsistence. Such must have been
the origin of the rights of property and dominion: and it was a sufﬁcient
ground to justify their establishment. Since their introduction, the
right which was common to all mankind is individually restricted to
what each lawfully possesses. The country which a nation inhabits,
whether that nation has emigrated thither in a body, or that the dif-
ferent families of which it consists were previously scattered over the
country, and there uniting, formed themselves into a political soci-
ety,—that country, I say, is the settlement of the nation, and it has a
peculiar and exclusive right to it.
This right comprehends two things: 1. The domain, by virtue of
which the nation alone may use this country for the supply of its ne-
cessities, may dispose of it as it thinks proper, and <99> derive from it
every advantage it is capable of yielding.—2. The empire, or the right
of sovereign command, by which the nation directs and regulates at its
pleasure every thing that passes in the country.
§203. Pos-
session of a
country by
a nation.
§204. Its
right over the
parts in its
possession.


214
book i: nations in themselves
When a nation takes possession of a country to which no priorowner
can lay claim, it is considered as acquiring the empire or sovereignty of
it, at the same time with the domain. For since the nation is free and
independent, it can have no intention, in settling in a country, to leave
to others the right of command, or any of those rights that constitute
sovereignty. The whole space over which a nation extends its govern-
ment, becomes the seat of its jurisdiction, and is called its territory.
If a number of free families, scattered over an independent country,
come to unite for the purpose of forming a nation or state, they all to-
gether acquire the sovereignty over the whole country they inhabit; for
they were previously in possession of the domain,—aproportionalshare
of it belonging to each individual family: and since they are willing to
form together a political society, and establish a public authority which
every member of the society shall be bound to obey, it is evidently their
intentiontoattribute tothatpublicauthoritytherightof commandover
the whole country.
All mankind have an equal right to things that have not yet falleninto
the possession of any one; and those things belong to the person who
ﬁrst takes possession of them. When therefore a nation ﬁnds a country
uninhabited and without an owner, it may lawfully take possession of
it: and after it has sufﬁciently made known its will in this respect, it
cannot be deprived of it by another nation. Thus navigators going on
voyages of discovery, furnished with a commission from theirsovereign,
and meeting with islands or other lands in a desert state, have taken
possession of them in the name of their nation: and this title has been
usually respected, provided it was soon after followed by a real
possession.
But it is questioned whether a nation can, by the bare act of taking
possession, appropriate to itself countries which it does not really oc-
cupy, and thus engross a much greater extent of territory than it is able
to people or cultivate. It is not difﬁcult to determine, that such a pre-
tension would be an absolute infringement of the natural rights of men,
and repugnant to the views of nature, which, having destined the whole
earth to supply the wants of mankind in general, gives no nation a right
to appropriate to itself a country, except for the purpose of making use
§205. Acquisi-
tion of the
sovereignty
in a vacant
country.
§206. Another
manner of
acquiring the
empire in a
free country.
§207. How a
nation appro-
priates to itself
a desert country.
§208. A ques-
tion on this
subject.


chapter xviii
215
of it, and not of hindering others from deriving advantage from it. The
law of nations will therefore not acknowledge the property and sover-
eignty of a nation over any uninhabited countries,exceptthoseof which
it has really taken actual possession, in which it has formed settlements,
or of which it makes actual use. In effect, when navigators havemetwith
desert countries in which those of other nations had, in their transient
visits, erected <100> some monument to shew their having taken pos-
session of them, they have paid as little regard to that empty ceremony,
as to the regulation of the popes, who divided a great part of the world
between the crowns of Castile and Portugal.*
* Those decrees being of a very singular nature, and hardly any where to be found
but in very scarce books, the reader will not be displeased with seeing here an extract
of them.
The bull of Alexander VI. by which he gives to Ferdinand and Isabella, king and
queen of CastileandArragon,theNewWorld,discoveredbyChristopherColumbus.
“Motu proprio,” (says the pope) “non ad vestram, vel alterius pro vobis super hoc
nobis oblatae petitionis instantiam, sed de nostrameraliberalitate,&excertascientia,
ac de apostolicae potestatis plenitudine, omnes insulas & terras ﬁrmas, inventas, &
inveniendas, detectas & detegendas versus occidentem & meridiem,” (drawing a line
from one pole to the other, at an hundred leagues to the west of the Azores) “auc-
toritate omnipotentis Dei nobis in beato Petro concessa, ac vicariatus Jesu Christi,
qua fungimur in terris, cum omnibus illarum dominiis, civitatibus, &c. vobis, hae-
redibusque & successoribus vestris, Castellae & Legionis regibus, in perpetuum te-
nore praesentium donamus, concedimus, assignamus, vosque, & haeredes ac succes-
sores praefatos, illorum dominos, cum plena libera & omni moda potestate,
auctoritate & jurisdictione, facimus, constituimus, & deputamus.” [[“We, of our
own accord, not at your instance nor the request of anyone else in your regard, but
of our ownsole largesse andcertainknowledgeandoutof thefullnessof ourapostolic
power, by the authority of Almighty God conferred upon us in blessed Peter and of
the vicarship of Jesus Christ, which we hold on earth, do by tenor of these presents,
should any of said islands have been found by your envoys and captains, give, grant,
and assign to you and your heirs and successors, kings of Castile and Leon, forever,
together with all their dominions, cities, camps, places, and villages, and all rights,
jurisdictions, and appurtenances, all islands and mainlands found and to be found,
discovered and to be discovered towards the west and south.” Alexander VI, In cae-
tera, May 4, 1493.]] The pope excepts only what might be in the possession of some
other Christian prince before the year 1493,—as if he had a greater right to give what
belonged to nobody, and especially what was possessed by the American nations.—
He adds: “Ac quibuscunque personis cujuscunque dignitatis, etiam imperialis & re-
galis, status, gradus, ordinis, vel conditionis, sub excommunicationis latae sententiae
poena, quam eo ipso, si contra fecerint, incurrant, districtius inhibemus ne ad insulas

216
book i: nations in themselves
There is another celebrated question, to which the discovery of the
new world has principally given rise. It is asked whether a nation may
lawfully take possession of some part of a vast country, in which there
are none but erratic nations whose scanty population is incapable of
occupying the whole? We have already observed (§81), in establishing
the obligation to cultivate the earth, that those nations cannot exclu-
sively appropriate to themselves more land than they have occasion for,
or more than they are able to settle and cultivate. Their unsettled hab-
itation in those immense regions cannot be accounted a true and legal
possession; and the people of Europe, too closely pent up at home, ﬁnd-
ing land of which the savages stood in no particular need, and of which
they made no actual and constant use, were lawfully entitled to take
possession of it, and settle it with colonies. The earth, as we have already
observed, belongs to mankind in general, and was designed to furnish
them with subsistence: if each nation had from the beginning resolved
to appropriate to itself a vast country, that the people might live only by
hunting, ﬁshing, and wild fruits, our globe would not be sufﬁcient to
maintain a tenth part of its present inhabitants. <101> We do not there-
fore deviate from the views of nature in conﬁning the Indians within
narrower limits. However, we cannot help praising the moderation of
the English puritans who ﬁrst settled in New England; who, notwith-
& terras ﬁrmas inventas & inveniendas, detectas & detegendas, versus occidentem
& meridiem . . . pro mercibus habendis, vel quavis alia de causa,accederepraesumant
absque vestra ac haeredum & successorum vestrorum praedictorum licentia speciali,
&c. Datum Romae apud S. Petrum anno 1493. IV. nonas Maji, Pontiﬁc. nostri anno
primo.” [[“Furthermore, under penalty of excommunication late sententie to be in-
curred ipso facto, should anyone thus contravene, we strictly forbid all persons of
whatsoever rank, even imperial and royal, or of whatsoever estate, degree, order, or
condition, to dare, without your special permit or that of your aforesaid heirs and
successors, to go for the purpose of trade or any other reason to the islands or main-
lands, found and to be found, discovered and to be discovered, towards the west and
south.”]] Leibnitii Codex Juris Gent. Diplomat. Diplom. 203.
See ibid. (Diplom. 165.) the bull by which pope Nicholas V. gave to Alphonso,
king of Portugal, and to the Infant Henry, the sovereignty of Guinea, and the power
of subduing the barbarous nations of those countries, forbidding any other to visit
that country, without the permission of Portugal. This act is dated Rome on the 8th
of January, 1454.
§209. Whether
it be lawful to
possess a part
of a country
inhabited only
by a few
wandering
tribes.


chapter xix
217
standing their being furnished with a charter from their sovereign, pur-
chased of the Indians the land of which they intended to take posses-
sion.* This laudable example was followed by William Penn74 and the
colony of quakers that he conducted to Pennsylvania.
When a nation takes possession of a distant country, and settles a
colony there, that country, though separated from the principal estab-
lishment, or mother-country, naturally becomes a part of the state,
equally with its ancient possessions. Whenever therefore the political
laws, or treaties, make no distinction between them, every thing said of
the territory of a nation, must also extend to its colonies.
chapter xix
Of our Native Country, and several Things
that relate to it.
The whole of the countries possessed by a nation and subject to its laws,
forms, as we have already said, its territory, and is the common country
of all the individuals of the nation. We have been obliged to anticipate
the deﬁnition of the term, native country (§122), because our subject led
us to treat of the love of our country,—a virtue so excellent and so nec-
essary in a state. Supposing then this deﬁnition already known, it re-
mains that we should explain several things that have a relation to this
subject, and answer the questions that naturally arise from it.
The citizens are the members of the civilsociety:boundtothissociety
by certain duties, and subject to its authority, they equally participate in
its advantages. The natives, or natural-born citizens, are those born in
the country, of parents who are citizens. As the society cannot exist and
perpetuate itself otherwise than by the children of the citizens, those
children naturally follow the condition of their fathers, and succeed to
* History of the EnglishColoniesinNorthAmerica.[[WilliamBurke,AnAccount
of the European Settlements in the Americas.]]
74. William Penn, 1644–1718.
§210.
Colonies.
§211. What is
our country.
§212. Citizens
and natives.


218
book i: nations in themselves
all their rights. The society is supposed to desire this, in consequence of
what it owes to its own preservation; and it is presumed, as matter of
course, that each citizen, on entering into society, reserves tohischildren
the right of becoming members of it. The countryof thefathersisthere-
fore that of the children; and these become true citizens merely by their
tacit consent. We shall soon see, whether, on their coming to the years
of discretion, they may renounce their right, and what they owe to the
society in which they were born. I say, that, in order to be of the country,
it is necessary that a person be born of a father who is a citizen; for if
he is born there of a foreigner, it will be only the place of his birth, and
not his country. <102>
The inhabitants, as distinguished from citizens, are foreigners, who
are permitted to settle and stay in the country. Bound to the society by
their residence, they are subject to the laws of the state, while they reside
in it; and they are obliged to defend it, because it grants themprotection,
though they do not participate in all the rights of citizens. They enjoy
only the advantages which the law or custom gives them. The perpetual
inhabitants are those who have received the right of perpetualresidence.
These are a kind of citizens of an inferior order, and are united to the
society, without participating in all its advantages. Their children follow
the condition of their fathers; and as the state has given to these theright
of perpetual residence, their right passes to their posterity.
A nation, or the sovereign who represents it, may grant to a foreigner
the quality of citizen, by admitting him into the body of the political
society. This is called naturalisation. There are some states in which the
sovereign cannot grant to a foreigner all the rights of citizens,—for ex-
ample, that of holding public ofﬁces,—and where, consequently, he has
the power of granting only an imperfect naturalisation. It is here a regu-
lation of the fundamental law, which limits the power of the prince. In
other states, as in England and Poland, the prince cannot naturalise a
single person, without the concurrence of the nation represented by its
deputies. Finally, there are states, as, for instance, England, where the
single circumstance of being born in the country naturalisesthechildren
of a foreigner.
§213.
Inhabitants.
§214.
Naturalisation.

chapter xix
219
It is asked, whether the children born of citizens in a foreign country
are citizens? The laws have decided this question in several countries,
and their regulations must be followed. By the law of nature alone, chil-
dren follow the condition of their fathers, and enter into all their rights
(§212); the place of birth produces no change in this particular, and can-
not of itself furnish any reason for taking from a child what nature has
given him; I say “of itself,” for civil or political laws may, for particular
reasons, ordain otherwise. But I suppose that the father has not entirely
quitted his country in order to settle elsewhere. If he has ﬁxed his abode
in a foreign country, he is become a member of another society, at least
as a perpetual inhabitant; and his children will be members of it also.
As to children born at sea, if they are born in those parts of it that
are possessed by their nation, they are born in the country: if it is on the
open sea, there is no reason to make a distinction between them and
those who are born in the country; for, naturally, it is our extraction,not
the place of our birth, that gives us rights: and if the children are born
in a vessel belonging to the nation, they may be reputed born in its ter-
ritories; for it is natural to consider the vessels of a nation as parts of its
territory, especially when they sail upon a free sea, since the state retains
its jurisdiction over those vessels. And as, according to the commonly
received custom, this jurisdiction is <103> preserved over the vessels,
even in parts of the sea subject to a foreign dominion, all the children
born in the vessels of a nation are considered as born in its territory. For
the same reason, those born in a foreign vessel are reputed born in a
foreign country, unless their birth took place in a port belonging to their
own nation: for the port is more particularly a part of the territory; and
the mother, though at that moment on board a foreign vessel, is not on
that account out of the country. I suppose that she and her husband
have not quitted their native country to settle elsewhere.
For the same reasons also, children born out of the country in the
armies of the state, or in the house of its minister at a foreign court, are
reputed born in the country; for a citizen, who is absent with his family
on the service of the state, but still dependent on it, and subject to its
jurisdiction, cannot be considered as having quitted its territory.
§215. Chil-
dren of citi-
zens, born
in a foreign
country.
§216. Chil-
dren born
at sea.
§217. Children
born in the
armies of the
state, or in the
house of its
minister at a
foreign court.


220
book i: nations in themselves
Settlement is a ﬁxed residence in any place with an intentionof always
staying there. A man does not then establish his settlement in any place,
unless he makes sufﬁciently known his intention of ﬁxing there, either
tacitly, or by an express declaration. However, this declaration is no rea-
son why, if he afterwards changes his mind, he may not transfer his set-
tlement elsewhere. In this sense, a person who stops at a place upon
business, even though he stay a long time, has only a simple habitation
there, but has no settlement. Thus the envoy of a foreign prince has not
his settlement at the court where he resides.
The natural or original settlement is that which we acquire by birth,
in the place where our father has his; and we are considered as retaining
it, till we have abandoned it, in order to chuse another. The acquired
settlement (adscititium) is that where we settle by our own choice.
Vagrants are people who have no settlement. Consequently those
born of vagrant parents have no country, since a man’s country is the
place where, at the time of his birth, his parents had their settlement
(§122), or it is the state of which his father was then a member;—which
comes to the same point: for to settle for ever in a nation, is to become
a member of it, at least as a perpetual inhabitant, if not with all the
privileges of a citizen. We may, however, consider the country of a va-
grant to be that of his child, while that vagrant is considered as not hav-
ing absolutely renounced his natural or original settlement.
Many distinctions will be necessary in order to give a complete so-
lution to the celebrated question, whether a man may quit his country
or the society of which he is a member. 1. The children are bound by
natural ties to the society in which they were born: they are under an
obligation to shew themselves grateful for the protection it has afforded
to their fathers, and are in a great measure indebted to it for their birth
and education. They ought therefore to love it, as we have already shewn
(§122),—to express a just gratitude to it, and requite its services as far as
possible by serving it in turn. We have observed above (§212), that they
have a right to enter <104> into the society of which their fathers were
members. But every man is born free; and the son of a citizen, when
come to the years of discretion, may examine whether it be convenient
for him to join the society for which he was destined by his birth. If he
§218.
Settlement.
§219.
Vagrants.
§220. Whether
a person may
quit his
country.


chapter xix
221
does not ﬁnd it advantageous to remain in it, he is at liberty to quit it
on making it a compensation for what it has done in his favour,* and
preserving, as far as his new engagements will allow him, the sentiments
of love and gratitude he owes it. A man’s obligations to hisnaturalcoun-
try may, however, change, lessen, or entirely vanish, according as heshall
have quitted it lawfully, and with good reason, in order to choose an-
other, or has been banished from it deservedly or unjustly, in due form
of law, or by violence.
2. As soon as the son of a citizen attains the age of manhood, and
acts as a citizen, he tacitly assumes that character; his obligations, like
those of others who expressly and formally enter into engagementswith
society, becomestrongerandmoreextensive:butthecaseisverydifferent
with respect to him of whom we have been speaking. When a society
has not been formed for a determinate time, it is allowable to quit it,
when that separation can take place without detriment to the society. A
citizen may therefore quit the state of which he is a member, provided
it be not in such a conjuncturewhenhecannotabandonitwithoutdoing
it a visible injury. But we must here draw a distinction between what
may in strict justice be done, and what is honourable and conformable
to every duty,—in a word, between the internal and the external obli-
gation. Every man has a right to quit his country, in order to settle in
any other, when by that step he does not endanger the welfare of his
country. But a good citizen will never determine on such a step without
necessity, or without very strong reasons. It is taking a dishonourable
advantage of our liberty, to quit our associates upon slight pretences,
after having derived considerable advantages from them: and this is the
case of every citizen with respect to his country.
3. As to those who have the cowardice to abandon their country in a
time of danger, and seek to secure themselves instead of defendingit,—
they manifestly violate the social compact, by which all the contracting
parties engaged to defend themselves in an united body, and in concert:
* This is the foundation of the tax paid on quitting a country, called, in Latin,
census emigrationis.


222
book i: nations in themselves
they are infamous deserters whom the state has a right to punish se-
verely.* <105>
In a time of peace and tranquillity, when the country has no actual
need of all her children, the very welfare of the state, and that of the
citizens, requires that every individual be at liberty to travel on business,
provided that he be always ready to return, whenever the public interest
recalls him. It is not presumed that any man has bound himself to the
society of which he is a member, by an engagement never to leave the
country when the interest of his affairs requires it, and when he can
absent himself without injury to his country.
The political laws of nations vary greatly in this respect. In some na-
tions,itisatalltimes,exceptincaseof actualwar,allowedtoeverycitizen
to absent himself, and even to quit the country altogether, whenever he
thinks proper, without alleging any reason for it. This liberty, contrary
in its own nature to the welfare and safety of society, can no where be
tolerated but in a country destitute of resources and incapable of sup-
plying the wants of its inhabitants. In such a country there can only be
an imperfect society; for civil society ought to be capable of enabling all
its members to procure by their labour and industry all the necessaries
of life:—unless it effects this, it has no right to require them to devote
themselves entirely to it. In some other states, every citizen is left at lib-
erty to travel abroad on business, but not to quit his country altogether,
without the express permission of the sovereign. Finally, there are states
where the rigour of the government will not permit any one whatsoever
to go out of the country, without passports in form, which are even not
* Charles XII. [[of Sweden, r. 1697–1718]] condemned to death andexecutedgen-
eral Patkul, a native of Livonia, whom he had made prisoner in an engagement with
the Saxons. But the sentence and execution were a violation of the laws of justice.
Patkul, it is true, had been born a subject of the king of Sweden: but he had quitted
his native country at the age of twelve years, and, having been promoted in the army
of Saxony, had, with the permission of his former sovereign, sold the property he
possessed in Livonia. He had therefore quitted his own country, to chuse another (as
every free citizen is at liberty to do, except, as we have observed above, at a critical
moment when the circumstances of his country require the aid of all her sons)—and
the King of Sweden, by permitting him to sell his property, had consented to his
emigration. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§221. How a
person may
absent himself
for a time.
§222. Varia-
tion of the
political laws
in this respect.
These must be
obeyed.
preface
The Law of Nations, though so noble and important a subject, has not
hitherto been treated of with all the care it deserves. The greater part of
mankind have therefore only a vague, a very incomplete, and often even
a false notion of it. The generality of writers, and even celebrated au-
thors, almost exclusively conﬁne the name of the Law of Nations to
certain maxims and customs which have been adopted by different na-
tions, and which the mutual consent of the parties has alone rendered
obligatory on them. This is conﬁning within very narrow bounds a law
so extensive in its own nature, and in which the whole human race are
so intimately concerned; it is at the same time a degradation of that law,
in consequence of a misconception of its real origin.
There certainly exists a natural law of nations, since the obligations
of the law of nature are no less binding on states, on men united in
political society, than on individuals. But, to acquire an exactknowledge
of that law, it is not sufﬁcient to know what the law of nature prescribes
to the individuals of the human race. The application of a rule to vari-
ous subjects can no otherwise be made than in a manner agreeable to
the nature of each subject. Hence it follows that the natural law of
nations is a particular science, consisting in a just and rational appli-
cation of the law of nature to the affairs and conduct of nations or
sovereigns. All those treatises, therefore, in which the law of nations is
blended and confounded with the ordinary law of nature,areincapable
of conveying a distinct idea or a substantial knowledge of the sacred
law of nations.
The Romans often confounded the law of nations with the law of
nature, giving the name of “the law of nations” (Jus Gentium) to the
law of nature, as <iv> being generally acknowledged and adopted by all

6
preface
civilised nations.* The deﬁnitions given by the emperorJustinian,of the
law of nature, the law of nations, and the civil law, are well known.“The
law of nature” says he, “is that which nature teaches to all animals”:†
thus he deﬁnes the natural law in its most extensive sense, not that nat-
ural law which is peculiar to man, and which is derived as well from his
rational as from his animal nature. “The civil law,” that emperor adds,
“is that which each nation has established for herself, and which pecu-
liarly belongs to each state or civil society. And that law, which natural
reasonhas established amongallmankind,andwhichisequallyobserved
by all people, is called the law of nations, as being a law which allnations
follow.”‡ In the succeeding paragraph the emperor seems to approach
nearer to the sense we at present give to that term. “The law of nations,”
says he, “is common to the whole human race. The exigencies and ne-
cessities of mankind have induced all nations to lay down and adopt
certain rules of right. For wars have arisen, and produced captivity and
servitude, which are contrary to the law of nature; since, by the law of
nature, all men were originally born free.”§ But, from what he adds—
that almost all kinds of contracts, those of buying and selling, of hire,
partnership, trust, and an inﬁnite number of <v> others, owe their or-
igin to that law of nations,—it plainly appears to have been Justinian’s
idea, that, according to the situations and circumstances in which men
were placed, right reason has dictated to them certain maxims of equity,
so founded on the nature of things, that they have been universally ac-
knowledged and adopted. Still this is nothing more than the law of na-
ture which is equally applicable to all mankind.
* Neque vero hoc solum natura, id est, jure gentium, &c. Cicero de Ofﬁc. lib. iii.
c. 5.
† Jus naturale est, quod natura omnia animalia docuit. Instit. lib. i. tit. 2.
‡ Quod quisque populus ipse sibi jus constituit, id ipsius proprium civitatis est,
vocaturque jus civile, quasi jus proprium ipsius civitatis: quod vero naturalis ratio
inter omnes homines constituit, id apud omnes peraeque custoditur, vocaturque jus
gentium, quasi quo jure omnes gentes utantur. Ibid. §1.
§ Jus autem gentium omni humano generi commune est: nam usu exigente et
humanis necessitatibus, gentes humanae jura quaedam sibi constituerunt. Bella
etenim orta sunt, et captivitates secutae et servitutes, quae sunt naturali juri contrar-
iae. Jure enim naturali omnes homines ab initio liberi nascebantur. Ibid. §2.


preface
7
The Romans, however, acknowledged a law whose obligations are re-
ciprocally binding on nations: and to that law they referred the right of
embassies. They had also their fecial law, which was nothing more than
the law of nations in its particular relation to public treaties, and espe-
cially to war. The feciales were the interpreters, the guardians, and, in a
manner, the priests of the public faith.*
The modernsaregenerallyagreedinrestrictingtheappellationof “the
law of nations” to that system of right and justice which oughttoprevail
between nations or sovereign states. They differ only in the ideas they
entertain of the origin whence that system arose, and of thefoundations
upon which it rests. The celebrated Grotius understands ittobeasystem
established bythecommonconsentof nations;andhethusdistinguishes
it from the law of nature: “When several persons, at different times and
in various places, maintain the same thing as certain, such coincidence
of sentiment mustbe attributed tosomegeneralcause.Now,intheques-
tions before us, that cause must necessarily be one or the other of these
two—either a just consequence drawn from natural principles, or a uni-
versal consent. <vi> The former discovers to us the law of nature, and
the latter, the law of nations.”†
That great man, as appears from many passages in his excellent work,
had a glimpse of the truth: but as he had the task of extracting from the
rude ore, as it were, and reducing into regular shape and form, a new
and important subject which had been much neglected before his time,
it is not surprising, that,—having his mind burthened with an immense
variety of objects, and with a numberless train of quotations which
* Feciales, quod ﬁdei publicae inter populos praeerant: nam per hos ﬁebat ut jus-
tum conciperetur bellum (et inde desitum), et ut foedere ﬁdes pacis constitueretur.
Ex his mittebant, antequam conciperetur, qui res repeterent: et per hos etiam nunc
ﬁt foedus. Varro de Ling. Lat. lib. iv. [[“The Fetiales [herald-priests] because they
were in charge of the state’s word of honor in matters between peoples; for by them
it was brought about that a war that was declared should be a just war, and by them
the war was stopped, that by a foedus [treaty], the ﬁdes [honesty] of the peace might
be established. Some of them were sent before war should be declared, to demand
restitution of the stolen property, and by them even now is made the foedus.” De
lingua Latina V.XV]]
† De Jure Belli & Pacis, translated by Barbeyrac: Preliminary Discourse, §41.


8
preface
formed a part of his plan,—he could not always acquire those distinct
ideas so necessary in the sciences. Persuaded that nations or sovereign
powers are subject to the authority of the law of nature, the observance
of which he so frequently recommends to them,—that learned man, in
fact, acknowledged a natural law of nations, which he somewhere calls
the internal law of nations: and perhaps it will appear that the only dif-
ference between him and us lies in the terms. But we have already ob-
served, that, in order to form this natural law of nations, it is not suf-
ﬁcient simply to apply to nations what the law of nature decides with
respect to individuals. And besides, Grotius, by his very distinction,and
by exclusively appropriating the name of “the law of nations” to those
maxims which have been established by the common consent of man-
kind, seems to intimate, that sovereigns, in their transactions with each
other, cannot insist on the observance of any but those last-mentioned
maxims,—reserving the internal law for the direction of their own con-
sciences. If—setting out with the idea that political societies or nations
live, with respect to each other, in a reciprocal independence, in the state
of nature, and that, as political bodies, they are subject to the natural
law—Grotius had moreover considered that the law must <vii> be ap-
plied to these new subjects in a manner suitable to their nature,—that
judicious author would easily have discovered that the natural law of
nations is a particular science; that it produces between nations even an
external obligation wholly independent of their will; and that the com-
mon consent of mankind is only the foundation and source of a par-
ticular kind of law called the Arbitrary Law of Nations.
Hobbes, in whose work we discover the hand of a master, notwith-
standing his paradoxes and detestable maxims,—Hobbes was, I believe,
the ﬁrst who gave a distinct though imperfect idea of the law of nations.
He divides the law of nature into that of man, and that of states: and
the latter is, according to him, what we usually call the law of nations.
“The maxims,” he adds, “of each of these laws are precisely the same:
but as states once established assume personal properties, that which is
termed the natural law when we speak of the duties of individuals, is
called the law of nations when applied to whole nations or states.”*This
* Rursus (lex) naturalis dividi potest in naturalem hominum, quae sola obtinuit


preface
9
author has well observed, that the law of nations is the law of nature
applied to states or nations. But we shall see in the course of this work,
that he was mistaken in the idea that the law of nature does not suffer
any necessary change in that application,—an idea from which he con-
cluded that the maxims of the law of nature and those of the law of
nations are precisely the same.
Puffendorf declares that he unreservedly subscribes to this opinion
espoused by Hobbes.* He has not therefore separately treated of the law
of nations, <viii> but has every-where blended it with the law of nature
properly so called.
Barbeyrac, who performed the ofﬁce of translator and commentator
to Grotius and Puffendorf, has approached much nearer to the true idea
of the law of nations. Though the work is in every body’s hands, I shall
here, for the reader’s convenience, transcribe one of that learned trans-
lator’s notes on Grotius’s Law of War and Peace.† “I acknowledge,”says
he, “that there are laws common toallnations,—thingswhichallnations
ought to practise towards each other: and if people choose to call these
the law of nations, they may do so with great propriety. But settingaside
the consideration that the consent of mankind is not the basis of the
obligation by which we are bound to observe those laws, and that it
cannot even possibly take place in this instance,—the principles and the
rules of such a law are in fact the same as those of the law of nature,
dici Lex Naturae, et naturalem civitatum, quae dici potest Lex Gentium, vulgo autem
Jus Gentium appellatur. Praecepta utriusque eadem sunt: sed quia civitates semel in-
stitutae induunt proprietates hominum personales, lex quam,loquentesdehominum
singulorum ofﬁcio, naturalem dicimus, applicata totis civitatibus, nationibus, sive
gentibus, vocatur Jus Gentium. De Cive, c. xiv. §4. [[“Again, the Natural Law may
be divided into that of men,whichalonehathobtainedthetitleof theLawof Nature,
and that of cities, which may be called Law of Nations, but vulgarly it is termed the
Right of Nations. (The precepts of both are alike, but because cities once instituted
do put on the personal proprieties of men, that law, which speaking of the duty of
single men, we call natural, being applied to whole cities, and nations, is called the
Right of Nations. And the same Elements of natural law, and right, which have
hitherto been spoken of, being transferred to whole cities and nations, may be taken
for the Elements of the laws, and Right of Nations.” Hobbes, De Cive, ed. Warren-
der, 28.]]
* Puffendorf’s Law of Nature and Nations, book ii. chap. iii. §23.
† Book i. chap. 1, §14, note 3.


10
preface
properly so called; the only difference consisting in the mode of their
application, which may be somewhat varied, on account of the differ-
ence that sometimes happens in the manner in which nations settletheir
affairs with each other.”
It did not escape the notice of the author we have just quoted, that
the rules and decisions of the law of nature cannot be purely and simply
applied to sovereign states, and that they must necessarily undergosome
modiﬁcations in order to accommodate them to the nature of the new
subjects to which they are applied. But it does not appear that he dis-
covered the full extent of this idea, since he seems not to approve of the
mode of treating the law of nations separately from the law of nature
as relating to individuals. He only commendsBudaeus’smethod,saying,
“it was right in that author to point out,* after each article of the law of
nature, the application which may be <ix> made of it to nations in their
mutual relations to each other,—so far at least as his plan permitted or
required that he should do this.”† Here Barbeyrac made one step at least
in the right track: but it required more profound reﬂection and more
extensive views in order to conceive the idea of a system of natural law
of nations, which should claimtheobedienceof statesandsovereigns,—
to perceive the utility of such a work, and especially to be the ﬁrst to
execute it.
This glory was reserved for the baron de Wolf. That greatphilosopher
saw that the law of nature could not, with such modiﬁcations as the
nature of the subjects required, and with sufﬁcient precision, clearness,
and solidity, be applied to incorporated nations or states, without the
assistance of those general principles and leading ideas by which the ap-
plication is to be directed;—that it is by those principles alone we are
enabled evidently to demonstrate that the decisions of the law of nature
respecting individuals must, pursuant to the intentions of that very law,
be changed and modiﬁed in their application to states and political so-
* In his Elementa Philos. Pract.
† Note 2 on Puffendorf’s Law of Nature and Nations, book ii. chap. 3, §23. I have
not been able to procure Budaeus’swork,fromwhichIsuspectthatBarbeyracderived
this idea of the Law of Nations.


preface
11
cieties,—and thus to form a natural and necessary law of nations:*
whence he concluded, that it was proper to form a distinct system of
the law of nations,—a task which he has happily executed. But <x> it
is just that we should hear what Wolf himself says in his Preface.1
“Nations,”† says he, “do not, in their mutual relations to each other,
acknowledge any other law than that which nature herself has estab-
lished. Perhaps, therefore, it may appear superﬂuous to give a treatiseon
the law of nations, as distinct from the law of nature. But those who
entertain this idea have not sufﬁciently studied the subject. Nations, it
is true, can only be considered as so many individual persons living to-
gether in the state of nature; and, for that reason, we must apply to them
all the duties and rights which nature prescribes and attributes to men
in general, as being naturally born free, and bound to each other by no
ties but thoseof naturealone.Thelawwhicharisesfromthisapplication,
and the obligations resulting from it, proceed from that immutable law
founded on the nature of man; and thus the law of nations certainly
belongs to the law of nature: it is therefore, on account of its origin,
called the natural, and, by reason of its obligatory force, the necessary
law of nations. That law is common to all nations; and if any one of
them does not respect it in her actions, she violates the common rights
of all the others.
“But nations or sovereign states being moral persons, and thesubjects
* If it were not more advisable, for the sake of brevity, of avoiding repetitions,
and taking advantage of the ideas already formed and established in the minds of
men,—if, for all these reasons, it were not more convenient to presuppose in this
instance a knowledge of the ordinary law of nature, and on that ground to undertake
the task of applying it to sovereign states,—it would, instead of speaking of such
application, be more accurate to say, that, as the law of nature, properly so called, is
the natural law of individuals and founded on the nature of man, so the natural law
of nations is the natural law of political societies, and founded on the nature of those
societies. But as the result of either mode is ultimately the same, I have in preference
adopted the more compendious one. As the law of nature has already been treated
of in an ample and satisfactory manner, the shortest way is simply to make a rational
application of it to nations.
† A nation here means a sovereign state, an independent political society.
1. Christian Wolff, Ius naturae et ius gentium (Halle, 1740–46).


12
preface
of the obligations and rights resulting, in virtue of the law of nature,
from the act of association which has formed the political body,—the
nature and essence of these moral persons necessarily differ, in many
respects, from the natureand essenceof thephysicalindividuals,ormen,
of whom they are composed. When, therefore, we would apply to na-
tions the duties which the law of nature prescribes to individual man,
and the rights it confers on him in order to enable him <xi> to fulﬁl his
duties,—since those rights and those duties can be no other than what
are consistent with the nature of their subjects, they must, in their ap-
plication, necessarily undergo a change suitable to the new subjects to
which they are applied. Thus we see that the law of nations does not in
every particular remain the same as the law of nature, regulating the
actions of individuals. Why may it not therefore be separately treated
of, as a law peculiar to nations?”
Being myself convinced of the utility of such a work, I impatiently
waited for Monsieur Wolf’s production, and, as soon as it appeared,
formed the design of facilitating, for the advantage of a greater number
of readers, the knowledge of the luminous ideas which it contains. The
treatise of the philosopher of Hall[[e]] on the law of nations is depen-
dentonallthoseof thesameauthoronphilosophyandthelawof nature.
In order to read and understand it, it is necessary to have previously
studied sixteen or seventeen quarto volumes which precede it. Besides,
it is written in the manner and even in the formal methodof geometrical
works. These circumstances present obstacles which render itnearlyuse-
less to those very persons in whom the knowledge and taste of the true
principles of the law of nations are most important and most desirable.
At ﬁrst I thought that I should have had nothing farther to do, than to
detach this treatise from the entire system by rendering it independent
of every thing Monsieur Wolf had said before, and to give it a newform,
more agreeable, and better calculated toensureitareceptioninthepolite
world. With that view, I made some attempts; but I soon found, that if
I indulged the expectation of procuring readers among that class of per-
sons for whom I intended towrite, and of renderingmyeffortsbeneﬁcial
to man-kind, it was necessary that I should form a very different work
from that which lay before me, and undertake to furnish an original


preface
13
production. The method <xii> followed by Monsieur Wolf has had the
effect of rendering his work dry, and in many respects incomplete. The
different subjects are scattered through it in a manner that is extremely
fatiguing to the attention: and as the author had, in his “Lawof Nature,”
treated of universal public law, he frequently contents himself with a
bare reference to his former production, when, in handling the law of
nations, he speaks of the duties of a nation towards herself.
From Monsieur Wolf’s treatise, therefore, I have only borrowed
whatever appeared most worthy of attention, especially the deﬁnitions
and general principles; but I have been careful in selecting what I drew
from that source, and have accommodated to my own plan thematerials
with which he furnished me. Those who have read Monsieur Wolf’s
treatises on the law of nature and the law of nations, will see what ad-
vantage I have made of them. Had I every-where pointed out what I
have borrowed, my pages would be crowded with quotations equally
useless and disagreeable to the reader. It is better to acknowledge here,
once for all, the obligations I am under to that great master. Although
my work be very different from his (as will appear to those who are will-
ingtotakethetroubleof makingthecomparison),IconfessthatIshould
never have had the courage to launch into so extensive a ﬁeld, if the
celebrated philosopher of Hall[[e]] had not preceded my steps, and held
forth a torch to guide me on my way.
Sometimes, however, I have ventured to deviate from the path which
he had pointed out, and have adopted sentiments opposite to his. I will
here quote a few instances. Monsieur Wolf, inﬂuenced perhaps by the
example of numerous other writers, has devoted several sections* to the
express purpose of treating of the nature of patrimonial kingdoms,
without rejecting or rectifying that idea so degrading to human kind. I
do not even admit of such a denomination, which I <xiii> thinkequally
shocking, improper, and dangerous, both in its effects, and in the im-
pressions it may give to sovereigns: and in this, I ﬂatter myself I shall
obtain the suffrage of every man who possesses the smallest spark of
reason and sentiment,—in short, of every true citizen.
* In the VIIIth Part of his Law of Nature, and in his Law of Nations.


14
preface
Monsieur Wolf determines (Jus Gent. §878) that it is naturallylawful
to makeuse of poisoned weaponsinwar.Iamshockedatsuchadecision,
and sorry to ﬁnd it in the work of so great a man. Happily for thehuman
race, it is not difﬁcult to prove the contrary, even from Monsieur Wolf’s
own principles. What I have said on this subject may beseeninBook III.
§156.
In the very outset of my work, it will be found that I differ entirely
from Monsieur Wolf in the manner of establishing the foundations of
that species of law of nations which we call voluntary. Monsieur Wolf
deduces it from the idea of a great republic (civitatismaximae)instituted
by nature herself, and of which all the nations of theworldaremembers.
According to him, the voluntary law of nations is, as it were, the civil
law of that great republic. This idea does not satisfy me; nor do I think
the ﬁction of such a republic either admissible in itself, or capable of
affording sufﬁciently solid grounds on which to build the rules of the
universal law of nations which shall necessarily claim the obedient ac-
quiescence of sovereign states. I acknowledge no other natural society
between nations than that which nature has established between man-
kind in general. It is essential to every civil society (civitati) that each
member have resigned a part of his right to the body of the society, and
that there exist in it an authority capable of commanding all the mem-
bers, of giving them laws, and of compelling those who should refuse
to obey. Nothing of this kind can be conceived or supposed to subsist
between nations. Each sovereign state claims and actually possesses an
absolute independence on <xiv> all the others. They are all, according
to Monsieur Wolf himself, to be considered as so many individuals who
live together in the state of nature, and who acknowledge no other laws
but those of nature, or of her Great Author. Now, although nature has
indeed established a general society between mankind, by creatingthem
subject to such wants as render the assistance of their fellow-creatures
indispensably necessary to enable them to live in a manner suitable to
men,—yet she has not imposed on them any particular obligation to
unite in civil society, properly so called: and if they all obeyed the in-
junctions of that good parent, their subjection to the restraints of civil
society would be unnecessary. It is true, that, as there does not exist in


preface
15
mankind a disposition voluntarily to observe towards each other the
rules of the law of nature, they have had recourse to a political associ-
ation, as the only adequate remedy against the depravity of the major-
ity,—the only means of securing the condition of the good, and re-
pressing the wicked: and the law of nature itself approves of this
establishment. But it is easy to perceive that the civic association is very
far from being equally necessary between nations, as it was between in-
dividuals. We cannot therefore say that nature equally recommends it,
much less that she has prescribed it. Individuals are so constituted, and
are capable of doing so little by themselves, that they can scarcelysubsist
without the aid and the laws of civil society. But as soon asaconsiderable
number of them have united under the same government, they become
able to supply most of their wants; and the assistance of other political
societies is not so necessary to them as that of individuals is to an in-
dividual. These societies have still, it is true, powerful motives for car-
rying on a communication and commerce with each other; and it is even
their duty to do it; since no man can, without good reasons, refuse as-
sistance to another man. But the law of nature may sufﬁce to regulate
this commerce, and this <xv> correspondence. States conduct them-
selves in a different manner from individuals. It is not usually thecaprice
or blind impetuosity of a single person that forms the resolutions and
determines the measures of the public: they are carried on with more
deliberation and circumspection: and, on difﬁcult or important occa-
sions, arrangements are made and regulations established by means of
treaties. To this we may add, that independence is even necessary toeach
state, in order to enable her properly to discharge the duties she owes to
herself and to her citizens, and to govern herself in the manner best
suited to her circumstances. It is therefore sufﬁcient (as I have already
said) that nations should conform to what is required of them by the
natural and general society established between all mankind.
But, says Monsieur Wolf, a rigid adherence to the law of nature can-
not always prevail in that commerce and society of nations; it must un-
dergo various modiﬁcations, which can only be deduced from this idea
of a kind of great republic of nations, whose laws, dictated by sound
reason and founded on necessity, shall regulatethealterationstobemade


16
preface
in the natural and necessary law of nations, as the civil laws of a partic-
ular state determine what modiﬁcations shall take place in the natural
law of individuals. I do not perceive the necessity of this consequence;
and I ﬂatter myself that I shall, in the course of this work, be able to
prove, that all the modiﬁcations, all the restrictions,—in a word, all the
alterations which the rigour of the natural law must be made to undergo
in the affairs of nations, and from which the voluntary law of nations
is formed,—to prove, I say, that all these alterations are deducible from
the natural liberty of nations, from the attention due to their common
safety, from the nature of their mutual correspondence, their reciprocal
duties, and the distinctions of their various rights, internal and external,
perfect and imperfect,—by a mode of reasoning nearly similar to that
which Mon-<xvi>sieur Wolf has pursued, with respect to individuals,
in his treatise on the law of nature.
In that treatise it is made to appear that the rules, which, in conse-
quence of the natural liberty of mankind, mustbeadmittedinquestions
of external right do not cancel the obligation which the internal right
imposes on the conscience of each individual. It is easy to apply this
doctrine to nations, and—by carefully drawing the line of distinction
between the internal and the external right—between the necessary and
the voluntary law of nations—to teach them not to indulge themselves
in the commission of every act which they may do with impunity,unless
it be approved by the immutable laws of justice, and the voice of
conscience.
Since nations, in their transactions with each other, areequallybound
to admit those exceptions to, and those modiﬁcations of, the rigour of
the necessary law, whether they be deduced from the idea of a great
republic of which all nations are supposed to be the members, orderived
from the sources whence I propose to draw them,—there can be no rea-
son why the system which thence results, should not be called the Vol-
untary Law of nations, in contradistinction to the necessary, internal,
and consciential law. Names are of very little consequence: but it is of
considerable importance carefully to distinguish these two kinds of law,
in order that we may never confound what is just and good in itself,with
what is only tolerated through necessity.


preface
17
The necessary and the voluntary law of nations are therefore both
established by nature, but each in a different manner; the former as a
sacred law which nations and sovereigns are bound to respect and follow
in all their actions; the latter, as a rule which the general welfare and
safety oblige them to admit in their transactions with each other. The
necessary law immediately proceeds from nature; and that common
mother of mankind recommends the obser-<xvii>vance of the volun-
tary law of nations, in consideration of the state in which nations stand
with respect to each other, and for the advantage of their affairs. This
double law, founded on certain and invariable principles, is susceptible
of demonstration, and will constitute the principal subject of this work.
There is another kind of law of nations, which authors call arbitrary,
because it proceeds from the will or consent of nations. States, as well
as individuals, may acquire rights and contract obligations, by express
engagements, by compacts and treaties: hence results a conventionallaw
of nations, peculiar to the contracting powers. Nations may also bind
themselves by their tacit consent: upon this ground rest all those regu-
lations which custom has introduced betweendifferentstates,andwhich
constitutetheusage of nations,orthelawof nationsfoundedoncustom.
It is evident that this law cannot impose any obligation except on those
particular nations who have, by long use, given their sanction to its max-
ims: it is a peculiar law, and limited in its operation, as the conventional
law: both the one and the other derive all their obligatory force from
that maxim of the natural law which makes it the duty of nations to
fulﬁl their engagements, whether express or tacit. The same maxim
ought to regulate the conduct of states with regard to the treaties they
conclude, and the customs they adopt. I must content myself with sim-
ply laying down the general rules and principles which the law of nature
furnishesforthedirectionof sovereignsinthisrespect.Aparticulardetail
of the various treaties and customs of different states belongs to history,
and not to a systematic treatise on the law of nations.
Such a treatise ought, as we have already observed, principally tocon-
sist in a judicious and rational application of the principles of the law
of nature to the affairs and conduct of nationsandsovereigns.Thestudy
of the law of nations supposes therefore a pre-<xviii>vious knowledge


18
preface
of the ordinary law of nature: and in fact I proceed on the supposition
that my readers are already, to a certain degree at least, possessed of that
knowledge. Nevertheless, as it is not agreeable to readers in general to
be obliged to recur to other authorities for proofs of what an author
advances, I have taken care to establish, in a few words, the most im-
portant of those principles of the law of nature which I intended to
apply to nations. But I have not always thoughtitnecessarytotracethem
to their primary foundations for the purposeof demonstration,buthave
sometimes contented myself with supporting them by common truths
which are acknowledged by every candid reader, without carrying the
analysis any farther. It is sufﬁcient for me to persuade, and for this pur-
pose to advance nothing as a principle, that will not readily be admitted
by every sensible man.
The law of nations is the law of sovereigns. It is principally for them
and fortheirministersthatitoughttobewritten.Allmankindareindeed
interested in it; and, in a free country, the study of its maxims is a proper
employment for every citizen: but it would be of little consequence to
impart the knowledge of it only toprivateindividuals,whoarenotcalled
to the councils of nations, and who have no inﬂuence in directing the
public measures. If the conductors of states, if all those who are em-
ployed in public affairs, condescended to apply seriously to the study of
a science which ought to be their law, and, as it were, the compass by
which to steer their course, what happy effects might we not expectfrom
a good treatise on the law of nations! We every day feel the advantages
of a good body of laws in civil society:—the law of nations is, in point
of importance, as much superior to the civil law, as the proceedings of
nations and sovereigns are more momentous in their consequencesthan
those of private persons.
But fatal experience too plainly proves, how little regard those who
are at the head of affairs pay to the <xix> dictates of justice, in con-
junctures where they hope to ﬁnd their advantage. Satisﬁed with be-
stowing their attention on a system of politics which is often false since
often unjust, the generality of them think they have done enough when
they have thoroughly studied that. Nevertheless we may truly apply to
states a maxim which has long been acknowledged as true with respect


preface
19
to individuals,—that the best and safest policy is that which is founded
on virtue. Cicero, as great a master in the art of government as in elo-
quence and philosophy, does not content himself with rejecting thevul-
gar maxim,that“astatecannotbehappilygovernedwithoutcommitting
injustice”; he even proceeds so far as to lay down the very reverse of the
proposition as an invariable truth, and maintains, that, “without a strict
attention to the most rigid justice, public affairs cannot be advanta-
geously administered.”*
Providence occasionally bestows on the world kings and ministers
whose minds are impressed with this great truth. Let us not renounce
the pleasing hope that the number of those wise conductors of nations
will one day be multiplied; and in the interim let us, each in his own
sphere, exert our best efforts to accelerate the happy period.
It is principally with a view of rendering my work palatable to those
by whom it is of the most importance that it should be read andrelished,
that I have sometimes joined examples to the maxims I advance: and in
that idea I have been conﬁrmed by the approbation of one of those
ministers who are the enlightened friends of the human race, and who
alone ought to be admitted into the councils of kings.2 But I have been
sparing in the use of such embellishments. Without ever aiming at a
vain parade of erudition, I only sought to afford an occasionalrelaxation
to the reader’s mind, <xx> or to render the doctrine more impressive by
an example, and sometimes to shew that the practice of nations is con-
formable to the principles laid down: and wheneverIfoundaconvenient
opportunity, I have, above all things, endeavoured to inspire a love of
virtue, by shewing, from some striking passage of history, how amiable
it is, how worthy of our homage in some truly great men, and even
productive of solid advantage. I have quoted the chief part of my ex-
* Nihil est quod adhuc de republicaˆ putem dictum, et quo possim longius pro-
gredi, nisi sit conﬁrmatum, non modo falsum esse istud, sine injuriaˆ non posse, sed
hoc verissimum, sine summaˆ justitiaˆ rempublicant regi non posse. Cicero,Fragment.
ex lib. de Republica.
2. Vattel is probably referring to his so-called protector Count Bru¨hl. As Vattel
considered Bru¨hl to be the very opposite of his idea of a good minister, the remark
is one of pure ﬂattery.


20
preface
amples from modern history, as well because these are more interesting,
as to avoid a repetition of those which have been already accumulated
by Grotius, Puffendorf, and their commentators.
As to the rest, I have, both in these examples and in my reasonings,
studiously endeavoured to avoid giving offence; it being my intention
religiously to observe the respect due to nations and sovereign powers:
but I have made it a still more sacred rule to respect the truth, and the
interests of the human race. If, among the base ﬂatterers of despotic
power, my principles meet with opponents, I shall have on my side the
virtuous man, the friend of the laws, the man of probity, and the true
citizen.
I should prefer the alternative of total silence, were I not at liberty in
my writings to obey the dictates of myconscience.Butmypenliesunder
no restraint, and I am incapable of prostituting it to ﬂattery. I was born
in a country of which liberty is the soul, the treasure, and the funda-
mental law; and my birth qualiﬁes me to be the friend of all nations.
These favourable circumstances have encouraged me in the attempt to
render myself useful to mankind by this work. I felt conscious of my
deﬁciency in knowledge and abilities: I saw that I was undertaking an
arduous task: but I shall rest satisﬁed if that class of readers whose opin-
ions are entitled to respect, discover in my labours the traces of the hon-
est man and the good citizen. <xxi>


21
contents
1
preliminaries
Idea and general Principles of the Law of Nations.
Sect. 1. What is meant by a nation or state,
page lv
2. It is a moral person,
lv
3. Deﬁnition of the law of nations,
lv
4. In what light nations or states are to be considered,
lvi
5. To what laws nations are subject,
lvi
6. In what the law of nations originally consists,
lvi
7. Deﬁnition of the necessary law of nations,
lviii
8. It is immutable,
lviii
9. Nations can make no change in it, nor dispense
with the obligations arising from it,
lviii
10. Society established by nature between all mankind,
lix
11. and between all nations,
lx
12. The object of this society of nations,
lxi
13. General obligation imposed by it,
lxi
14. Explanation of this observation,
lxi
15. The second general law is the liberty and
independence of nations,
lxii
16. Effect of that liberty,
lxii
17. Distinctions between internal and external, perfect
and imperfect obligations and rights,
lxii
18. Equality of nations,
lxiii
19. Effect of that equality,
lxiii
20. Each nation is mistress of her own actions, when
they do not affect the perfect rights of others,
lxiii
21. Foundation of the voluntary law of nations,
lxiii
22. Right of nations against the infractors of the law
of nations,
lxiv
1. The page numbers in the Contents are those of the 1797 edition.


22
original contents
Sect. 23. Measure of that right,
page lxiv
24. Conventional law of nations, or law of treaties,
lxv
25. Customary law of nations,
lxv
26. General rule respecting that law,
lxv
27. Positive law of nations,
lxvi
28. General maxim respecting the use of the necessary
and the voluntary law, <xxii>
lxvi
book i
Of Nations considered in themselves.
chapter i
Of Nations or Sovereign States.
1. Of the state, and of sovereignty,
1
2. Authority of the body politic over the members,
1
3. Of the several kinds of government,
2
4. What are sovereign states,
2
5. States bound by unequal alliance,
2
6. or by treaties of protection,
2
7. Tributary states,
3
8. Feudatory states,
3
9. Two states subject to the same prince,
3
10. States forming a federal republic,
3
11. A state that has passed under the dominion
of another,
3
12. Objects of this treatise,
4
chapter ii
General Principles of the Duties of
a Nation towards herself.
13. A nation ought to act agreeably to her nature,
4
14. Preservation and perfection of a nation,
4
15. End of civil society,
5
16. A nation is under an obligation to preserve herself,
5
17. and to preserve her members,
5
18. A nation has a right to every thing necessary for her
preservation,
6
19. She ought to avoid every thing that might occasion
her destruction,
6


original contents
23
Sect. 20. Her right to every thing that may promote
this end,
page 6
21. A nation ought to perfect herself and her condition,
6
22. and to avoid every thing contrary to her perfection,
7
23. The rights she derives from these obligations,
7
24. Examples,
7
25. A nation ought to know herself,
8
chapter iii
Of the Constitution of a State, and the Duties and
Rights of a Nation in that respect.
26. Of the public authority,
8
27. What is the constitution of a state, <xxiii>
8
28. The nation ought to choose the best constitution,
9
29. Political, fundamental, and civil laws,
9
30. Support of the constitution, and obedience to
the laws,
9
31. Rights of a nation with respect to her constitution
and government,
10
32. She may reform the government,
10
33. and may alter the constitution,
10
34. Of the legislative power, and whether it can alter
the constitution,
11
35. The nation ought not to attempt it without
great caution,
12
36. She is the judge of all disputes relative to
the government,
12
37. No foreign power has a right to interfere,
12
chapter iv
Of the Sovereign, his Obligations, and his Rights.
38. Of the sovereign,
12
39. He is solely established for the safety and advantage
of society,
13
40. His representative character,
14
41. He is intrusted with the obligations of the nation,
and invested with her rights,
14
42. His duty with respect to the preservation and
perfection of the nation,
14
43. His rights in that respect,
14


24
original contents
Sect. 44. He ought to know the nation,
page 15
45. Extent of his power:—prerogatives of majesty,
15
46. The prince is bound to respect and support the
fundamental laws,
15
47. He may change the laws not fundamental,
16
48. He is bound to maintain and observe the
existing laws,
16
49. In what sense he is subject to the laws,
16
50. His person is sacred and inviolable,
17
51. But the nation may repress a tyrant, and renounce
her allegiance to him,
17
52. Arbitration between the king and his subjects,
20
53. Obedience which subjects owe to a sovereign,
21
54. In what cases they may resist him,
21
55. Ministers,
23
chapter xix
223
granted without great difﬁculty. In all these cases it is necessary to con-
form to the laws, when they are made by a lawful authority. But in the
last-mentioned case, the sovereign abuses his power, andreduceshissub-
jects to an insupportable slavery, if he refuses them permission to travel
for their own advantage, when he might grant it to them without in-
convenience, and without danger to the state. Nay it will presently ap-
pear, that, on certain occasions, he cannot, under any pretext, detain
persons who wish to quit the country with the intention of abandoning
it for ever.
There are cases in which a citizen has an absolute right to renounce
his country, and abandon it entirely,—a right, founded on reasons de-
rived from the very nature of the social compact.—1. If the citizen can-
not procure subsistence in his own country, it is undoubtedly lawful for
him to seek it elsewhere. For political or civil society being entered into
only with a view of facilitating to each of its members the means of
supporting himself, and of living in happiness and safety, it would be
absurd to pretend that a member, whom it cannot furnish with such
things as are most necessary, has not a right to leave it.
2. If the body of the society, or he who represents it, absolutely fail
to discharge their obligations towards a citizen, the latter may withdraw
himself. For if one of the contracting parties does not observe his en-
gagements, the other is no longer bound to fulﬁl his; for the contract is
reciprocal between the society and <106> its members. It is on the same
principle also that the society may expel a member who violates its laws.
3. If the major part of the nation, or the sovereign who represents it,
attempt to enact laws relative to matters in which the social compact
cannot oblige every citizen to submission, those who are averse to these
laws have a right to quit the society, and go settle elsewhere.Forinstance,
if the sovereign, or the greater part of the nation, will allow but one
religion in the state, those who believe and profess another religion have
a right to withdraw, and to take with them their families and effects.For
they cannot be supposed to have subjected themselves to the authority
of men, in affairs of conscience;* and if the society suffers and is weak-
* See, above, the chapter on religion.
§223. Cases in
which a citizen
has a right
to quit his
country.


224
book i: nations in themselves
ened by their departure, the blame must be imputed to the intolerant
party: for it is they who fail in their observance of the social compact,—
it is they who violate it, and force the others to a separation. We have
elsewhere touched upon some other instances of this third case,—that
of a popular state wishing to have a sovereign (§33),—and that of an
independent nation taking the resolution to submit to a foreign power
(§195).
Those who quit their country for any lawful reason, with a design to
settle elsewhere, are calledemigrants, andtaketheirfamiliesandproperty
with them.
Their right to emigrate may arise from several sources. 1. In the cases
we have just mentioned (§223), it is a natural right, which is certainly
reserved to each individual in the very compact itself by which civil so-
ciety was formed.
2. The liberty of emigration may, in certain cases, be secured to the
citizens by a fundamental law of the state. The citizens of Neufchatel
and Valangin in Switzerland may quit the country and carry off their
effects at their own pleasure, without even paying any duties.
3. It may be voluntarily granted them by the sovereign.
4. Finally, this right may be derived from some treaty made with a
foreign power, by which a sovereign has promised to leave full liberty to
those of his subjects, who, for a certain reason, on account of religion
for instance, desire to transplant themselves into the territories of that
power. There are such treaties between the German princes, particularly
for cases in which religion is concerned. In Switzerlandlikewise,acitizen
of Bernwhowishesto emigratetoFribourgandthereprofessthereligion
of the place, and reciprocally a citizen of Fribourg who, for a similar
reason, is desirous of removing to Bern, has a right to quit his native
country, and carry off with him all his property.
It appears from several passages in history, particularly the history of
Switzerland and the neighbouring countries, that the law of nations,
established there by custom some ages back, did not permit a state to
receive the subjects of another state into the number of its citizens. This
vicious custom had no other <107> foundationthantheslaverytowhich
the people were then reduced. A prince, a lord, ranked his subjectsunder
§224.
Emigrants.
§225. Sources
of their right.


chapter xix
225
the head of his private property: he calculated their number, as he did
that of his ﬂocks; and, to the disgrace of human nature, this strange
abuse is not yet every where eradicated.
If the sovereignattemptstomolestthosewhohavearighttoemigrate,
he does them an injury; and theinjuredindividualsmaylawfullyimplore
the protection of the power who is willing to receive them. Thus we
have seen Frederic William,75 king of Prussia, grant his protection tothe
emigrant protestants of Saltzburgh.
The name of supplicants is given to all fugitives who implore the pro-
tection of a sovereign against the nation or prince they have quitted. We
cannot solidly establish what the law of nations determines with respect
to them, until we havetreated of thedutiesof onenationtowardsothers.
Finally, exile is another manner of leaving our country. An exile is a
man driven from the place of his settlement, or constrained to quit it,
but without a mark of infamy. Banishment is a similar expulsion, with
a mark of infamy annexed.* Both may be for a limited time, or for ever.
If an exile or banished man had his settlement in his own country, he is
exiled or banished from his country. It is however proper to observe that
common usage applies also the terms, exile and banishment, to the ex-
pulsion of a foreigner who is driven from a country where he had no
settlement, and to which he is, either for a limited time or for ever, pro-
hibited to return.
As a man may be deprived of any right whatsoever by way of pun-
ishment,—exile, which deprives him of the right of dwellinginacertain
place, may be inﬂicted as a punishment: banishment is always one; for
a mark of infamy cannot be set on any one, but with the view of pun-
ishing him for a fault, either real or pretended.
* The common acceptation of these two terms is not repugnant toourapplication
of them. The French academy says, “Banishment is only applied to condemnations
in due course of law,—Exile is only an absence caused by some disgrace at court.”—
The reasonisplain;—suchacondemnationfromthetribunalof justiceentailsinfamy
on the emigrant; whereas a disgrace at court does not usually involve the same
consequence.
75. Frederic William I, r. 1713–40.
§226. If the
sovereign
infringes their
right, he
injures them.
§227.
Supplicants.
§228. Exile
and banish-
ment.


226
book i: nations in themselves
When the society has excluded one of its members by a perpetual
banishment, he is only banished from the lands of that society, and it
cannot hinder him from living wherever else he pleases; for, after having
driven him out, it can no longer claim any authority over him. The con-
trary, however, may take place by particular conventions between two
or more states. Thus every member of the Helvetic confederacy may
banish its own subjects out of the territories of Switzerland in general;
and in this case the banished person will not be allowed to live in any
of the cantons, or in the territories of their allies.
Exile is divided into voluntary and involuntary. It is voluntary, when
a man quits his settlement, to escape some punish-<108>ment, or to
avoid somecalamity,—andinvoluntary,whenitistheeffectof asuperior
order.
Sometimes a particular place is appointed, where the exiled person is
to remain during his exile; or a certain space is particularised, which he
is forbid toenter.Thesevariouscircumstancesandmodiﬁcationsdepend
on him who has the power of sending into exile.
A man, by being exiled or banished, does not forfeit the human char-
acter,norconsequentlyhisrighttodwellsomewhereonearth.Hederives
this right from nature, or rather from its author, who has destined the
earth for the habitation of mankind; and the introduction of property
cannot have impaired the right which every man has to the use of such
things as are absolutely necessary,—a right which he brings with him
into the world at the moment of his birth.
But though this right is necessary and perfect in the general view of
it, we must not forget that it is but imperfect with respect to each par-
ticular country. For, on the other hand, every nation has a right to refuse
admitting a foreigner into her territory, when he cannot enter it without
exposing the nation to evident danger, or doing her a manifest injury.
What she owes to herself, the care of her own safety, gives her this right;
and in virtue of her natural liberty, it belongs to the nation to judge,
whether her circumstances will or will not justify the admission of that
foreigner (Prelim. §16). He cannot then settle by a full right, and as he
pleases, in the place he has chosen, but must ask permission of the chief
of the place; and if it is refused, it is his duty to submit.
§229. The
exile and
banished
man have a
right to live
somewhere.
§230. Nature
of this right.


chapter xix
227
However, as property could not be introduced to the prejudice of the
right acquiredbyeveryhumancreature,of notbeingabsolutelydeprived
of such things as are necessary,—no nation can, without good reasons,
refuse even a perpetual residence to a man driven from his country. But
if particular and substantial reasons prevent her from affording him an
asylum, this man has no longer any right to demand it,—because, in
sucha case, thecountryinhabitedbythenationcannot,atthesametime,
serve for her own use, and that of this foreigner. Now, supposing even
that things are still in common, nobody can arrogate to himself the use
of a thing which actually serves to supply the wants of another. Thus a
nation, whose lands are scarcely sufﬁcient to supply the wants of the
citizens, is not obliged to receive into its territories a company of fugi-
tives or exiles. Thus it ought even absolutely to reject them, if they are
infected with a contagious disease. Thus also it has a right to send them
elsewhere, if it has just cause to fear that they will corrupt the manners
of the citizens, that they will create religious disturbances, or occasion
any other disorder, contrary to the public safety. In a word, it has a right,
and is even obliged, to follow, in this respect, the suggestions of pru-
dence. But this prudence should be free from unnecessary suspicionand
jealousy;—it should not be carried so far as to <109> refuse a retreat to
the unfortunate, for slight reasons,andongroundlessandfrivolousfears.
The means of tempering it will be never to lose sight of that charity and
commiseration which are due to the unhappy. We must not suppress
those feelings even for those who have fallen into misfortune through
their own fault. For we ought to hate the crime, but love the man, since
all mankind ought to love each other.
If an exile or banished man has been driven from his country for any
crime, it does not belong to the nation in which he has taken refuge, to
punish him for that fault committed in a foreign country. For nature
does not give to men or to nations any righttoinﬂictpunishment,except
for their owndefenceand safety(§169);whenceitfollows,thatwecannot
punish any but those by whom we have been injured.
But this very reason shews, that, although the justice of each nation
ought in general to be conﬁned to the punishment of crimes committed
in its own territories, we ought to except from this rule those villains,
§231. Duty
of nations
towards them.
§232. A nation
cannot punish
them for faults
committed
out of its
territories,
§233. except
such as affect the
common safety
of mankind.

228
book i: nations in themselves
who, by the nature and habitual frequency of their crimes, violate all
public security, and declare themselves the enemies of the human race.
Poisoners, assassins, and incendiaries by profession, may be extermi-
nated wherever they are seized; for they attack and injure all nations, by
trampling under foot the foundations of their common safety. Thus pi-
rates are sent to the gibbet by the ﬁrst into whose hands they fall. If the
sovereign of the country where crimes of that nature have been com-
mitted, reclaims the perpetrators of them in order to bring them to pun-
ishment, they ought to be surrendered to him, as being the person who
is principally interested in punishing theminanexemplarymanner.And
as it is proper to have criminals regularly convicted by a trial in due form
of law, this is a second reason for delivering up malefactors of that class
to the states where their crimes have been committed.
chapter xx
Of public, common, and private Property.
Let us now see what is the nature of the different things contained in
the country possessed by a nation, and endeavour toestablishthegeneral
principles of the law by which they are regulated. This subject is treated
by civilians under the title de rerum divisione. There are things which in
their own nature cannot be possessed; there are others, of whichnobody
claims the property, and which remain common, as in their primitive
state, when a nation takes possession of a country: the Roman lawyers
called these things res communes, things common: such were, withthem,
the air, the running water, the sea, the ﬁsh, and wild beasts.
Every thing susceptible of property is considered as belonging to the
nation that possesses the country, and as forming the aggre-<110>gate
mass of its wealth. But the nation does not possess all those things in
the same manner. Those not divided between particular communities,
or among the individuals of a nation, are called public property. Some
are reserved for the necessities of the state, and form the demesne of the
§234. What
the Romans
called res
communes.
§235. Aggre-
gate wealth of
a nation, and
its divisions.


chapter xx
229
crown, or of the republic: others remain common to all thecitizens,who
take advantage of them, each according to his necessities, or according
to the laws which regulate their use; and these are called common prop-
erty.—There are others that belong to some body or community,termed
joint property, res universitatis; and these are, with respect to this body in
particular, what the public property is with respect to the whole nation.
As the nation may be considered as a great community, we may indif-
ferently give the name of common property to those things that belong
to it in common, in such a manner that all the citizens may make use
of them, and to those that are possessed in the same manner by a body
or community: the same rules hold good with respect to both.—Finally,
the property possessed by individuals is termed private property, res
singulorum.
When a nation in a body takes possession of a country, every thing
that is not divided among its members remains common to the whole
nation, and is called public property. There is a second way whereby a
nation, and, in general, every community, may acquire possessions, viz.
by the will of whosoever thinks proper to convey to it, under any title
whatsoever, the domain or property of what he possesses.
As soon as the nation commits the reins of government to the hands
of a prince, it is considered as committing to him, at the same time,
the means of governing. Since therefore the income of thepublicprop-
erty, of the domain of the state, is destined for the expenses of gov-
ernment, it is naturally at the prince’s disposal, and ought always to be
considered in this light, unless the nation has, in express terms, ex-
cepted it in conferring the supreme authority, and hasprovidedinsome
other manner for its disposal, and for the necessary expenses of the
state, and the support of the prince’s person and household.Whenever
therefore the prince is purely and simply invested with the sovereign
authority, it includes a full discretional power to dispose of the public
revenues. The duty of the sovereign indeed obliges him to apply those
revenues only to the necessities of the state; but he alone istodetermine
the proper application of them, and is not accountable for them to any
person.
§236. Two
ways of
acquiring
public
property.
§237. The
revenues of
the public
property are
naturally at the
sovereign’s
disposal.


230
book i: nations in themselves
The nation may invest the superior with the sole use of its common
possessions, and thus add them to the domain of the state. It may even
cede the property of them to him. But this cession of the use or prop-
erty requires an express act of the proprietor, which is the nation. It is
difﬁcult to found it on a tacit consent, because fear too often hinders
the subjects from protesting against the unjust encroachments of the
sovereign.
The people may even allow the superior the domain of the things
they possess in common, and reserveto themselvesthe<111>useof them
in the whole or in part. Thus the domain of a river, for instance, may
be ceded to the prince, while the people reserve to themselves the use of
it for navigation, ﬁshing, the watering of cattle, &c. Theymayalsoallow
the prince the sole right of ﬁshing, &c. inthatriver.Inaword,thepeople
may cede to the superior whatever right they please over the common
possessions of the nation; but all those particular rights do not naturally
and of themselves ﬂow from the sovereignty.
If the income of the public property, or of the domain, is not sufﬁ-
cient for the public wants, the state supplies the deﬁciency by taxes.
These ought to be regulated in such a manner, that all the citizens may
pay their quota in proportion to their abilities, and the advantages they
reap from the society. All the members of civil society being equally
obliged to contribute, according to their abilities, to its advantage and
safety,—they cannot refuse to furnish the subsidies necessary to its pres-
ervation, when they are demanded by lawful authority.
Many nations have been unwilling to commit to the prince a trust of
so delicate a nature, or to grant him a power that he may so easily abuse.
In establishing a domain for the support of the sovereign and the or-
dinary expenses of the state, they have reserved to themselves the right
of providing, by themselves or by their representatives,forextraordinary
wants, in imposing taxes payable by all the inhabitants. In England, the
king lays the necessities of the state before the parliament; that body,
composed of the representatives of the nation, deliberates, and,withthe
concurrence of the king, determines the sum to be raised, and the man-
ner of raising it. And of the use the king makes of themoneythusraised,
that same body oblige him to render them an account.
§238. The
nation may
grant him
the use and
property of
its common
possessions,
§239. or allow
him the do-
main, and
reserve to
itself the use
of them.
§240. Taxes.
§241. The
nation may
reserve to itself
the right of
imposing
them.


chapter xx
231
In other states where the sovereign possesses the full and absolute au-
thority, it is he alone that imposes taxes, regulates the manner of raising
them, and makes use of them as he thinks proper, without giving an
account to any body. The French king at present enjoys this authority,
with the simple formality of causing his edicts to be registered by the
parliament; and that body has a right to make humble remonstrances,
if it sees any inconveniences attending the imposition ordered by the
prince:—a wise establishment for causing truth and the cries of the peo-
ple to reach the ears of the sovereign, and for setting some bounds to
hisextravagance,ortotheavidityof theministersandpersonsconcerned
in the revenue.* <112>
The prince who is invested with the power of taxing his peopleought
by no means to consider the money thus raised as his own property. He
ought never to lose sight of the end for which this power was granted
* Too great attention cannot be used in watching the imposition of taxes, which,
once introduced, not only continue, but are so easily multiplied.—Alphonso VIII.
king of Castile [[r. 1158–1214]], besieging a city belonging to the Moors (Concham
urbem in Celtiberis) [[the city of Concha (now Cuenca) in Celtiberia (central
Spain)]], and being in want of money, applied to the states of his kingdom for per-
mission to impose on every free inhabitant a capitation-tax of ﬁve golden maravedis.
But Peter, count de Lara, vigorously opposed the measure, “contractaque nobilium
manu, ex conventu discedit, armis tueri paratus partam armis et virtute a majoribus
immunitatem, neque passurum afﬁrmans nobilitatis opprimendae atque novis vec-
tigalibus vexandae ab eo aditu initium ﬁeri; Mauros opprimere non esse tanti, ut
graviori servitute rempublicam implicari sinant. Rex, periculo permotus, ab ea cog-
itationedesistit.Pertrumnobiles,consiliocommunicato,quotannisconvivioexcipere
decreverunt, ipsum et posteros,—navatae operae mercedem, rei gestae bonae poster-
itati monumentum, documentumque ne quavis occasione jus libertatis imminui pa-
tiantur.” [[And having gathered the group of noblemen, he leaves the assembly,ready
to defend with arms and bravery the immunity obtained by their predecessors, and
afﬁrming that he was not going to tolerate through this opportunity the beginning
of the oppression of the nobility and its harassment with new taxes, and [afﬁrming]
that oppressing the Moors was not so expensive for them to allow thecommonwealth
to be entangled in a more degrading servitude. The king, moved by the danger, de-
sisted from thatintention.Oncethisdecisionhadbeencommunicated,thenoblemen
decided to celebrate Peter every year in a banquet, him and his successors, as a reward
for a zealous act and a reminder and testimony of a good work, so that on no occasion
would they allow the right to freedom [ius libertatis] to be diminished (trans.Eds.).]]
MARIANA. [[Juan de Mariana, De rege et regis institutione.]] [[Note added in 1773/
1797 editions.]]
§242. Of the
sovereign who
has this power.
§243. Duties
of the prince
with respect
to taxes.


232
book i: nations in themselves
him: the nation was willing to enable him to provide, as it should seem
best to his wisdom, for the necessities of the state. If he diverts this
money to other uses,—if he consumes it in idle luxury, to gratify his
pleasures, to satiate the avarice of his mistresses and favourites,—wehes-
itate not to declare to those sovereigns who are still capable of listening
to the voice of truth, that such a one is not less guilty, nay, that he is a
thousand times more so, than a private person who makes use of his
neighbours’ property to gratify his irregular passions. Injustice, though
screened from punishment, is not the less shameful.
Every thing in the political society ought to tend to the good of the
community; and since even the persons of the citizens are subject to this
rule, their property cannot be excepted. The state could not subsist, or
constantly administer the public affairs in the most advantageous man-
ner, if it had not a power to dispose occasionally of all kinds of property
subject to its authority. It is even to be presumed, that, when the nation
takes possession of a country, the property of certain things is given up
to individuals only with this reserve. The right which belongs to the
society, or to the sovereign, of disposing, in case of necessity and for the
public safety, of all the wealth contained in thestate,iscalledtheeminent
domain. It is evident that this right is, in certain cases, necessary to him
who governs, and consequently is a part of the empire or sovereign
power, and ought to be placed in the number of the prerogatives of
majesty (§45). When therefore the people confer the empire on any one,
they at the same time invest him with the eminent domain, unless it be
expressly reserved. Every prince who is truly sovereign is invested with
this right when the nation has not excepted it,—however limited his
authority may be in other respects.
If thesovereigndisposesof thepublicproperty invirtueof hiseminent
domain, the alienation is valid, as having been made with sufﬁcient
powers.
When, in a case of necessity, he disposes in like manner of the pos-
sessions of a community or an individual, the alienation will, for the
same reason, be valid. But justice requires that this community or this
individual be indemniﬁed at the public charge: and if the treasury is not
able to bear the expense, all the citizens are obliged to contribute to it;
§244. Emi-
nent domain
annexed to the
sovereignty.


chapter xx
233
for the burthens of the state ought to be supported equally, or in a just
proportion. The same rules <113> are applicable to this case as to the loss
of merchandise thrown overboard to save the vessel.
Besides the eminent domain, the sovereignty gives a right of another
nature over all public, common, and private property,—that is, the em-
pire, or the right of command in all places of the country belonging to
the nation. The supreme power extends to every thing that passes in the
state, wherever it is transacted; and consequently the sovereign com-
mands in all public places, on rivers, on highways, in deserts, &c. Every
thing that happens there is subject to his authority.
In virtue of the same authority, the sovereign may make laws to reg-
ulate the manner in which common property is to be used,—as well the
property of the nation at large, as that of distinct bodiesorcorporations.
He cannot, indeed, take away their right from those who have a share
in that property: but the care he ought to take of the public repose, and
of the common advantage of the citizens, gives him doubtless a right to
establish laws tending to this end, and consequently to regulatetheman-
ner in which things possessed in common are to be enjoyed. This affair
might give room for abuses, and excite disturbances, which it is impor-
tant to the state to prevent, and against which the prince is obliged to
take just measures. Thus the sovereign may establish wise laws with re-
spect to hunting and ﬁshing,—forbid them in the seasons of propaga-
tion,—prohibit the use of certain nets, and of everydestructivemethod,
&c. But as it is only in the character of the common father, governor,
and guardian of his people, that the sovereign has a right to make those
laws, he ought never to lose sight of the ends which he is called upon to
accomplish by enacting them: and if, upon those subjects, he makes any
regulations with any other view than that of thepublicwelfare,heabuses
his power.
A corporation, as well as every other proprietor, has a right to alienate
and mortgage its property: but the present members ought never to lose
sight of the destination of that jointproperty,nordisposeof itotherwise
than for the advantage of the body, or in cases of necessity. If they alien-
ate it with any other view, they abuse their power, and transgress against
the duty they owe to their own corporation and their posterity; and the
§245. Govern-
ment of public
property.
§246. The
superior may
make laws
with respect
to the use
of things
possessed in
common.
§247. Alien-
ation of the
property of a
corporation.

234
book i: nations in themselves
prince, in quality of common father, has a right to oppose the measure.
Besides, the interest of the state requires that the property of corpora-
tions be not squandered away;—which gives the prince, intrusted with
the care of watching over the public safety, a new right to prevent the
alienation of such property. It is then very proper to ordain in a state,
that the alienation of the property of corporations should be invalid,
without the consent of the superior powers. And indeed the civil law,
in this respect, gives to corporations the rights of minors. But this is
strictly no more than a civil law; and the opinion of those who make
the law of nature alone a sufﬁcient authority to take from a corporation
the power of alienating their property without the <114> consent of the
sovereign, appears to me to be void of foundation, and contrary to the
notion of property. A corporation, it is true, may have receivedproperty
either from their predecessors, or from any other persons, with a clause
that disables them from alienating it: but in this case they have only the
perpetual use of it, not the entire and free property. If any of their prop-
erty was solely given for the preservation of the body, it is evident that
the corporation has not a right to alienate it, except in a case of extreme
necessity:—and whatever property they may have received fromthesov-
ereign, is presumed to be of that nature.
All the members of a corporation have an equal right to the use of
its common property. But, respecting the manner of enjoying it, the
body of the corporation may make suchregulationsastheythinkproper,
provided that those regulations be not inconsistent with that equality
which ought to be preserved in a communion of property. Thus a cor-
poration may determine the use of a common forest or pasture, either
allowing it to all the members according to their wants, or allotting to
each an equal share; but they have not a right to exclude any one of the
number, or to make a distinction to his disadvantage by assigning him
a less share than that of the others.
All the members of a body having an equal right to its commonprop-
erty, each individual ought so to manage in taking advantage of it, as
not in any wise to injure the common use. According to this rule, an
individual is not permitted to construct upon any river that is public
property, any work capable of rendering it less convenient for the use of
§248. Use
of common
property.
§249. How
each member
is to enjoy it.


chapter xx
235
every one else, as erecting mills, making a trench to turn the water upon
his own lands, &c. If he attempts it, he arrogates to himself a private
right, derogatory to the common right of the public.
The right of anticipation (jus praeventionis) ought to be faithfully
observed in the use of common things which cannot be used by several
persons at the same time. This name is given to the right which the ﬁrst-
comer acquires, to the use of things of this nature. For instance, if I am
actually drawing water from a common or public well, another who
comes after me cannot drive me away to draw out of it himself: and he
ought to wait till I have done. For I make use of my right in drawing
that water, and nobody can disturb me: a second, who has anequalright,
cannot assert it to the prejudice of mine; to stop me by his arrival,would
be arrogating to himself a better right than he allows me, and thereby
violating the law of equality.
The same rule ought to be observed in regard tothosecommonthings
which are consumed in using them. They belong to the person who ﬁrst
takes possession of them with the intention of applying them to hisown
use; and a second, who comes after, has no right to take them from him.
I repair to a common forest, and begin to fell a tree: you come in after-
wards, and would wish to have the same tree: you cannot take it from
me; for this would be arrogating to yourself a right superior to mine,
<115> whereas our rights are equal. The rule in this case is the same as
that which the law of nature prescribes in the use of the productions of
the earth, before the introduction of property.
The expenses necessary for the preservation or reparation of the
things that belong to the public, or to a community, ought to be equally
borne by all who have a share in them, whether the necessary sums be
drawn from the common coffer, or that each individual contributes his
quota. The nation, the corporation, and, in general, every collective
body, may also establish extraordinary taxes, imposts, or annual contri-
butions, to defray those expenses,—provided there be no oppressive ex-
action in the case, and that the money so levied be faithfully applied to
the use for which it was raised. To this end also, as we have before ob-
served (§103), toll-duties are lawfully established. High-ways, bridges,
and causeways, are things of a public nature, from which all who pass
§250. Right of
anticipation in
the use of it.
§251. The
same right in
another case.
§252. Preser-
vation and
repairs of
common
possessions.


236
book i: nations in themselves
over them derive advantage: it is therefore just that all those passengers
should contribute to their support.
We shall see presently that the sovereign ought to provideforthepres-
ervation of the public property. He is no less obliged, as the conductor
of the whole nation, to watch over the preservation of the property of
a corporation. It is the interest of the state at large that a corporation
should not fall into indigence, by the ill conduct of its members for the
time being. And as every obligation generates the correspondent right
which is necessary to discharge it, the sovereign has here a right to oblige
the corporation to conform to their duty. If therefore he perceives, for
instance, that they suffer their necessary buildings to fall to ruin, or that
they destroy their forests, he has a right to prescribe what they ought to
do, and to put his orders in force.
We have but a few words to say with respect to private property:every
proprietor has a right to make what use he pleases of his own substance,
and to dispose of it as he pleases, when the rights of a third person are
not involved in the business. The sovereign, however, as the father of
his people, may and ought to set bounds to a prodigal, and to prevent
his running to ruin, especially if this prodigal be the father of a family.
But he must take care not to extend this right of inspection so far as to
lay a restraint on his subjects in the administration of their affairs;—
which would be no less injurious to the true welfare of the state than to
the just liberty of the citizens. The particulars of this subject belong to
public law and politics.
It must also be observed, that individuals are not so perfectly free in
the economy or government of their affairs, as not to be subject to the
laws and regulations of police made by the sovereign. For instance, if
vineyards are multiplied to too great an extent in a country which is in
want of corn, the sovereign may forbid the planting of the vine in ﬁelds
proper for tillage; for here the public welfare and the safety of the state
are concerned. When a reason of such importance requires it, the sov-
ereign or the magistrate may oblige an individual to sell alltheprovisions
<116> in his possession above what are necessary for the subsistence of
his family, and may ﬁx the price he shall receive for them. The public
authority may and ought to hinder monopolies, and suppress all prac-
§253. Duty
and right of
the sovereign
in this respect.
§254. Private
property.
§255. The
sovereign may
subject it to
regulations
of police.


chapter xxi
237
tices tending to raise the price of provisions,—to which practices the
Romans applied the expressionsannonamincendere,comprimere,vexare. 76
Every man may naturally chuse the person to whom he would leave
his property after his death, as long as his right is not limited by some
indispensable obligation,—as, for instance, that of providing for the
subsistence of his children. The children also have naturally a right to
inherit their father’s property in equal portions. But this is no reason
why particular laws may not be established in a state, with regard to
testaments and inheritances,—a respect being however paid to the es-
sential laws of nature. Thus, by a rule established in many places with
a view to support noble families, the eldest son is, of right, his father’s
principal heir. Lands, perpetually appropriated to the eldest male heir
of a family, belong to him by virtue of anotherright, whichhasitssource
in the will of the person, who, being sole owner of those lands, has be-
queathed them in that manner.
chapter xxi
Of the Alienation of the public Property, or the
Domain, and that of a Part of the State.
The nation being the sole mistress of the property inher possession,may
dispose of it as she thinks proper, and may lawfully alienate or mortgage
it. This right is a necessary consequence of the full and absolutedomain:
the exercise of it is restrained by the law of nature, only with respect to
proprietors who have not the use of reason necessary for the manage-
ment of their affairs; which is not the case with a nation. Those who
think otherwise cannot allege any solid reason for their opinion; and it
would follow from their principles, that no safe contract can be entered
into with any nation;—a conclusion, which attacks the foundation of
all public treaties.
76. “To increase, lower [compress], or alter the marketrate[of theyear’sharvest].”
§256.
Inheritances.
§257. The
nation may
alienate its
public
property.


238
book i: nations in themselves
But it is very just to say that the nation ought carefully to preserve
her public property,—to make a proper use of it,—not to dispose of it
without good reasons, nor to alienate or mortgage it but for a manifest
public advantage, or in case of a pressing necessity. This is an evident
consequence of the duties a nation owes to herself. The public property
is extremely useful and even necessary to the nation; and she cannot
squander it improperly, without injuring herself, and shamefully ne-
glecting the duty of self-preservation. I speak of the public property
strictly so called, or the domain of the state. Alienating its revenues is
cutting the sinews of government. As to the property common to all the
citizens, the nation does an injury to those who derive advan-<117>tage
from it, if she alienates it without necessity, or without cogent reasons.
She has a right to do this as proprietor of thesepossessions;butsheought
not to dispose of them except in a manner that is consistent with the
duties which the body owes to its members.
The same duties lie on the prince, the director of the nation:heought
to watch over the preservation and prudent management of the public
property,—to stop and prevent all waste of it,—and not suffer it to be
applied to improper uses.
The prince, or the superior of the society, whatever he is, being nat-
urally no more than the administrator, and not the proprietor of the
state, his authority, as sovereign or head of the nation, does not of itself
give him a right to alienate or mortgage the public property. The general
rule then is, that the superior cannot dispose of the public property, as
to its substance,—the right to do this being reserved to the proprietor
alone, since proprietorship is deﬁned to be the right to dispose of athing
substantially. If the superior exceeds his powerswithrespecttothisprop-
erty, the alienation he makes of it will be invalid, and may at any time
be revoked by his successor, or by the nation. This is the law generally
received in France; and it was upon this principle that the duke of Sully*
advised Henry IV. to resume the possession of all the domains of the
crown alienated by his predecessors.
* See his Memoirs.
§258. Duties
of a nation in
this respect.
§259. Duties
of the prince.
§260. He
cannot alienate
the public
property.


chapter xxi
239
The nation having the free disposal of all the property belonging to
her (§257), may convey her right to the sovereign, and consequentlycon-
fer upon him that of alienating and mortgaging the public property.But
this right not being necessary to the conductor of the state, to enable
him to render the people happy by his government,—it is not to be
presumed, that the nation have given it to him; and if they have not
made an express law for that purpose, we are to conclude that the prince
is notinvested withit,unlesshehasreceivedfull,unlimited,andabsolute
authority.
The rules we have just established relate to alienations of publicprop-
erty in favour of individuals. The question assumes a different aspect
when it relates to alienations made by one nation to another:* it requires
other principles to decide it in the different cases that may presentthem-
selves. Let us endeavour to give a general theory of them.
1. It is necessary that nations should be able to treat and contract val-
idly with each other, since they would otherwise ﬁnd it impossible to
bring their affairs to an issue, or to obtain the blessings of peace with
any degree of certainty. Whence it follows, that when a nation has ceded
any part of its property to another, the cession ought to be deemed valid
and irrevocable, as <118> in fact it is, in virtue of the notion of property.
This principle cannot be shaken by any fundamental law, by which a
nation might pretend to deprive themselves of the power of alienating
what belongs to them: for this would be depriving themselves of all
power to form contracts with other nations, or attempting to deceive
them. A nation with such a law ought never to treat concerning its prop-
erty: if it is obliged to it by necessity, or determined to do it for its own
* Quod domania regnorum inalienabilia & semper revocabilia dicuntur, id res-
pectu privatorum intelligitur; nam contra alias gentes divino privilegio opus foret.
[[“The domains of kings are said to be inalienable and always revocable [i.e., subject
to forfeit], and this is understood to apply to private individuals, for against other
nations there is need of special law from God” (trans. Eds.). (Kings cannot sell off
their territories to private individuals and indeed are trustees rather than absoluteown-
ers of their lands, but when it comes to international relations we need different rules
from God governing territorial acquisition and transfer.)]] Leibnitz, Praefat. ad Cod.
Jur. Gent. Diplomat. [[Leibniz, Introduction to Codex juris gentium diplomaticus.]]
§261. The
nation may
give him a
right to it.
§262. Rules on
this subject
with respect
to treaties
between nation
and nation.

240
book i: nations in themselves
advantage, the moment it broaches a treaty on the subject, it renounces
its fundamental law. It is seldom disputed that an entire nation may
alienate what belongs to itself: but it is asked, whether its conductor, its
sovereign, has this power? The question may be determined by the fun-
damental laws. But if the laws say nothing directly on this subject, then
we have recourse to our second principle, viz.
2. If the nation has conferred the full sovereignty on its conductor,—
if it has intrusted to him the care, and, without reserve, given him the
right, of treating and contracting with other states, it is considered as
having invested him with all the powers necessary to make a valid con-
tract. The prince is then the organ of the nation; what he does is con-
sidered as the act of the nation itself; and though he is not the owner
of the public property, his alienations of it are valid, as being duly
authorised.
The question becomes more difﬁcult, when it relates, not tothealien-
ation of some parts of the public property, but to the dismembering of
the nation or state itself,—the cession of a town or a province that con-
stitutes a part of it. This question however admits of a sound decision
on the same principles. A nation ought to preserveitself (§16),—itought
to preserve all its members,—it cannot abandon them; and it is under
an engagement to support them in their rank as members of the nation
(§17). It has not then a right to trafﬁc with their rank and liberty, on
account of any advantages it may expect to derive from such a negoti-
ation. They have joined the society for the purpose of being members
of it:—they submit to the authority of the state, for the purpose of pro-
moting in concert their common welfare and safety, and not of being at
its disposal, like a farm or an herd of cattle. But the nation may lawfully
abandon them in a case of extreme necessity; and she has a right to cut
them off from the body, if the public safety requires it. When therefore,
in such a case, the state gives up a town or a province to a neighbour or
to a powerful enemy, the cession ought to remain valid as to the state,
since she had a right to make it: nor can she any longer lay claim to the
town or province thus alienated, since she has relinquished every right
she could have over them.
§263. Alien-
ation of a part
of the state.
chapter xxi
241
But this province or town, thus abandoned and dismembered from
the state, is not obliged to receive the new master whom the state at-
tempts to set over it. Being separated from the society of which it was a
member, it resumes all its original rights; and if it be capable of de-
fending its liberty against the prince who would subject it to his au-
thority, it may lawfully resist him. <119> Francis I.77 having engaged by
the treaty of Madrid78 to cede the duchy of Burgundy to the emperor
Charles V.79 the states of thatprovincedeclared,“that,havingneverbeen
subject but to the crown of France, they would die subject to it; and
that if the king abandoned them, they would take up arms, and en-
deavour to set themselves at liberty, rather than pass into a new state of
subjection.”* It is true, subjects are seldom able to make resistance on
such occasions; and, in general, their wisest plan will be to submit to
their new master, and endeavour to obtain the best terms they can.
Has the prince—or the superior, of whatever kind—a power to dis-
member the state?—We answer as we have done above with respect to
the domain:—if the fundamental laws forbid all dismembermentbythe
sovereign, he cannot do it without the concurrence of the nation or its
representatives. But if the laws are silent, and if the prince has received
a full and absolute authority, he is then the depositary of the rights of
the nation, and the organ by which it declares its will. The nation ought
never to abandon its members but in a case of necessity, or with a view
to the public safety, and to preserve itself from total ruin; and the prince
ought not to give them up except for the same reasons. But since he has
received an absolute authority, it belongs to him to judge of thenecessity
of the case, and of what the safety of the state requires.
On occasion of the above-mentioned treaty of Madrid, the principal
persons in France, assembled at Cognac80 after the king’s return, unan-
* Mezeray’s History of France, vol. ii, p. 458.
77. Francis I, r. 1515–47.
78. Treaty of Madrid, 1526.
79. Charles Vreigned as Holy RomanEmperor(1519–56)andalsoasKingCarlos I
of Spain (1516–56).
80. 1526.
§264. Rights
of the dismem-
bered party.
§265. Whether
the prince
has power to
dismember
the state.


242
book i: nations in themselves
imously resolved, “that his authority did not extend so far as to dismem-
ber the crown.”* The treaty was declared void, as being contrary to the
fundamental law of the kingdom: and indeed it had been concluded
without sufﬁcient powers: for as the laws in express terms refused to the
king the power of dismembering the kingdom, the concurrence of the
nation was necessary for that purpose; and it might give its consent by
the medium of the states-general. Charles V. ought not to have released
his prisoner before those very states had approved the treaty; or rather,
making a more generous use of his victory, he should have imposed less
rigorous conditions, such as Francis I. would have been able to comply
with, and such as he could not, without dishonour, have refused to per-
form. But now that there are nolonger anymeetingsof thestates-general
in France, the king remains the sole organ of the state, with respect to
other powers: these latter have a right to take his will for that of all
France; and the cessions the king might make them, wouldremainvalid,
in virtue of the tacit consent by which the nation has vested the king
with unlimited powers to treat with them. Were it otherwise, no solid
treaty could be entered into with the crown of France. For greater se-
curity, however, other powers have <120> often required that their trea-
ties should be registered in the parliament of Paris: but at present even
this formality seems to be laid aside.
chapter xxii
Of Rivers, Streams, and Lakes.
When a nation takes possession of a country with a view to settle there,
it takes possession of every thing included in it, as lands, lakes, rivers,
&c. But it may happen that the country is bounded and separated from
another by a river;—in which case, it is asked, to whom this river be-
longs? It is manifest from the principles established in Chap. XVIII.that
it ought to belong to the nation who ﬁrst took possession of it. This
* Mezeray, ibid.
§266. A river
that separates
two territories.


chapter xxii
243
principle cannot be denied; but the difﬁculty is, to maketheapplication.
It is not easy to determine which of the two neighbouring nations was
the ﬁrst to take possession of a river that separates them.—For the de-
cision of such questions, the rules which may be deduced from the prin-
ciples of the law of nations, are as follow:—
1. When a nation takes possession of a country bounded by a river,
she is considered as appropriating to herself the river also; for the utility
of a river is too great to admit a supposition that the nation did not
intend to reserve it to herself. Consequently, the nation that ﬁrst estab-
lished her dominion on one of the banks of the river, is considered as
being the ﬁrst possessor of all that part of the river which bounds her
territory. When there is question of a very broad river, this presumption
admits not of a doubt, so far at least as relates to a part of the river’s
breadth; and the strength of the presumption increases or diminishes in
an inverse ratio with the breadth of the river: for the narrower the river
is, the more does the safety and convenience of its use require that it
should be subject entirely to the empire and property of that nation.
2. If that nation has made any use of the river, as for navigation or
ﬁshing, it is presumed with the greater certainty, that she has resolved to
appropriate the river to her own use.
3. If, of two nations inhabiting the opposite banksof theriver,neither
party can prove that they themselves, or those whose rights they inherit,
were the ﬁrst settlers in those tracts, it is to be supposed that bothnations
came there at the same time, since neither of them can give any reason
for claiming the preference: and in this case, the dominion of each will
extend to the middle of the river.
4. A long and undisputed possession establishes the right of nations;
otherwise there could be no peace, no stability between them: and no-
toriousfactsmustbeadmittedtoprovethepossession.Thus,when,from
time immemorial, a nation has without contradiction exercised the sov-
ereignty upon a river which forms <121> her boundary, nobody can dis-
pute with that nation the supreme dominion over the river in question.
5. Finally, if treaties determine any thing on this question, they must
be observed. Todecide itbyaccurateandexpressstipulations,isthesafest
mode: and such is, in fact, the method taken by most powers at present.


244
book i: nations in themselves
If a river leaves its bed, whether it be dried up or takes its course
elsewhere, the bed belongs to the owner of the river; for the bed is a part
of the river; and he who had appropriated to himself the whole, had
necessarily appropriated to himself all its parts.
If a territory which terminates on a river has no other boundary than
that river, it is one of those territories that have natural or indeterminate
bounds (territoria arciﬁnia), and it enjoys the right of alluvion; that is
to say,—every gradual increase of soil, every addition which the current
of the river may make to its bank on that side, is an addition to that
territory, stands in the samepredicament withit,andbelongstothesame
owner. For if I take possession of a piece of land, declaring that I will
have for its boundary the river which washes its side,—or if it is given
to me upon that footing,—I thus acquire beforehand the right of allu-
vion; and consequently I alone may appropriate to myself whatever ad-
ditions the current of the river may insensibly make to my land:—I say
“insensibly,” because in the very uncommon case, called avulsion, when
the violence of the stream separates a considerable part from one piece
of land and joins it to another, but in such manner that it can still be
identiﬁed, the property of the soil so removed naturallycontinuesvested
in its former owner. The civil laws have thus provided against and de-
cided this case when it happens between individual and individual; they
ought to unite equity with the welfare of the state, and the care of pre-
venting litigations.
In case of doubt, every territory terminating on a river is presumed
to have no other boundary than the river itself; because nothing is more
natural than to take a river for a boundary, when a settlement is made;
and wherever there is a doubt, that is always to be presumed, which is
most natural and most probable.
As soon as it is determined that a river constitutes the boundary-line
between two territories, whether it remains common to the inhabitants
on each of its banks, or whether each shares half of it,—or, ﬁnally,
whether it belongs entirely to one of them,—their rights with respect to
the river are in no wise changed by the alluvion. If therefore it happens
that, by a natural effect of the current, one of the two territoriesreceives
an increase, while the river gradually encroachesontheoppositebank,—
§267. Of the
bed of a river
which is dried
up or takes an-
other course.
§268. The
right of
alluvion.
§269. Whether
alluvion
produces any
change in the
right to a river.


chapter xxii
245
the river still remains the natural boundary of the two territories, and,
notwithstanding the progressive changes in its course, each retains over
it the same rights which it possessed before; so that, if, for instance, it
be divided in the middle between the owners of the opposite banks,that
middle, though it changes its place, will continue to <122> be the line of
separation between the two neighbours. The one loses, it is true,whilethe
other gains: but nature alone produces this change: she destroys the land
of the one, while she forms new land for the other. The case cannot be
otherwisedetermined,sincetheyhavetakentheriveralonefortheirlimits.
But if, instead of a gradual and progressivechangeof itsbed,theriver,
by an accident merely natural, turns entirely out of its course, and runs
into one of the two neighbouring states, the bed which it hasabandoned
becomes thenceforward their boundary, and remains the propertyof the
former owner of the river (§267): the river itself is, as it were, anihilated
in all that part, while it is reproduced in its new bed, and there belongs
only to the state in which it ﬂows.
This case is very different from that of a river which changesitscourse
without going out of the same state. The latter, in its new course, con-
tinues to belong to its former owner, whether that owner be the state or
any individual to whom the state has given it,—because rivers belong to
the public, in whatever part of the country they ﬂow. Of the bed which
it has abandoned, a moiety accrues to the contiguous lands on each side,
if they are lands that have natural boundaries with the right of alluvion.
That bed (notwithstanding what we have said in §267) is no longer the
property of the public, because of the right of alluvion vested in the
owners of its banks, and because the public held possession of the bed,
only on account of its containing a river. But if the adjacent lands have
not natural boundaries, the public still retains the property of the bed.
The new soil over which the river takes its course is lost to theproprietor,
because all the rivers in the country belong to the public.
It is not allowable to raise any works on the bank of a river, which
have a tendency to turn its course, and to cast it upon the oppositebank:
this would be promoting our own advantage at our neighbour’sexpense.
Each can only secure himself, and hinder the current from undermining
and carrying away his land.
§270. What is
the case when
the river
changes
its bed.
§271. Works
tending to
turn the
current,

246
book i: nations in themselves
In general, no person ought to build on a river, any more than else-
where, any work that is prejudicial to his neighbour’s rights. If a river
belongs to one nation, and another has an incontestablerighttonavigate
it, the former cannot erect upon it a dam or a mill which might render
it unﬁt for navigation. The right which the owners of the river possess
in this case is only that of a limited property; and, in the exercise of it,
they are bound to respect the rights of others.
But when two different rights to the same thing happen toclashwith
each other, it is not always easy to determine which ought to yield to
the other: the point cannot be satisfactorily decided, without atten-
tively considering the nature of the rights, and their origin. For ex-
ample, a river belongs to me, but you have a right to ﬁsh in it: and the
question is, whether I may erect mills on my river, whereby the ﬁshery
will become more difﬁcult and less advantageous? The nature of our
rights seems <123> to determine the question in the afﬁrmative.—I, as
proprietor, have an essential right over the river itself:—you have only
a right to make use of it,—a right which is merely accessory, and de-
pendent on mine: you have but a general right to ﬁsh as you can in my
river, such as you happen to ﬁnd it, and in whatever state I may think
ﬁt to possess it. I do not deprive you of your right by erecting my mills:
it still exists in the general view of it; and if it becomes less useful to
you, it is by accident, and because it is dependent on the exercise of
mine.
The case is different with respect to the right of navigation, of which
we have spoken. This right necessarily supposes that the river shall re-
main free and navigable, and therefore excludes every work that will en-
tirely interrupt its navigation.
The antiquity and origin of the rights serve, no less than their nature,
to determine the question. The more ancient right, if it be absolute, is
to be exerted in its full extent, and the other only so far as it may be
extended withoutprejudicetotheformer;foritcouldonlybeestablished
on this footing, unless the possessor of the ﬁrst right has expressly con-
sented to its being limited.
In the same manner, rights ceded by the proprietor of any thing are
considered as ceded without prejudice to the other rights that belong to
§272. or, in
general, preju-
dicial to the
rights of
others.
§273. Rules
in relation to
interfering
rights.
chapter xxii
247
him, and only so far as they are consistent with these latter, unless an
express declaration, or the very nature of the right, determine it other-
wise. If I have ceded to another the right of ﬁshing in my river, it is
manifest that I have ceded it without prejudice to my other rights, and
that I remain free to build on that river such works as I think proper,
even though they should injure the ﬁshery, provided they do not alto-
gether destroy it. A work of this latter kind, such as a dam that would
hinder the ﬁsh from ascending it, could not be built but in a case of
necessity, and on making, according to circumstances, an adequatecom-
pensation to the person who has a right to ﬁsh there.
What we have said of rivers and streams, may be easily applied to
lakes. Every lake, entirely included in a country, belongs to the nation
that is the proprietor of that country; for, in taking possession of a ter-
ritory, a nation is considered as having appropriated to itself every thing
included in it: and as it seldom happens that the property of a lake of
any considerable extent falls to the share of individuals, it remains com-
mon to the nation. If this lake is situated between two states, it is pre-
sumed to be divided between them at the middle, while there is no title,
no constant and manifest custom, to determine otherwise.
What has been said of the right of alluvion in speaking of rivers, is
also to be understood as applying to lakes. When a lake, which bounds
a state, belongs entirely to it, every increase in the extent of that lake
falls under the same predicament as the lake itself; but it is necessarythat
the increase should be insensible, as that of land in alluvion, and more-
over that it be real, constant, and complete. To explain myself more
fully,—1. I speak of insensible increase: this is the reverse of alluvion:
the question <124> here relates to the increase of a lake, as in the other
case to an increase of soil. If this increase be not insensible,—if thelake,
overﬂowing its banks, inundates a large tract of land, this new portion
of the lake, this tract thus covered with water, still belongs to its former
owner. Uponwhat principlescanwefoundtheacquisitionof itinbehalf
of the owner of the lake? The space is very easily identiﬁed, though it
has changed its nature: and it is too considerable to admit a presumption
that the owner had no intention to preserve it to himself, notwithstand-
ing the changes that might happen to it.
§274. Lakes.
§275. Increase
of a lake.


248
book i: nations in themselves
But, 2. If the lake insensibly undermines a part of the opposite ter-
ritory, destroys it, and renders it impossible to be known, by ﬁxing itself
there, andaddingittoitsbed,thatpartof theterritoryislosttoitsformer
owner; it no longer exists; and the whole of the lake thus increased still
belongs to the same state as before.
3. If some of the lands bordering on the lake are only overﬂowed at
high water, this transient accident cannot produce any change in their
dependence. The reason why the soil, which the lake invades by little
and little, belongs to the owner of the lake, and is lost to its former
proprietor,isbecausetheproprietorhasnootherboundarythanthelake,
nor any other marks than its banks, to ascertain how far his possessions
extend. If the water advances insensibly, he loses; if it retires in like
manner, he gains: such must have been the intention of the nationswho
have respectively appropriated to themselves the lake and the adjacent
lands:—it can scarcely be supposed that they had any other intention.
But a territory overﬂowed for a time, is not confounded with the rest of
the lake: it can still be recognised; and the owner may still retain hisright
of property in it. Were it otherwise, a town overﬂowed by a lake would
become subject to a different government during the inundation, and
return to its former sovereign as soon as the waters were dried up.
4. For the same reasons, if the waters of the lake, penetrating by an
opening into the neighbouring country, there form a bay, or new lake,
joined to the ﬁrst by a canal,—this new body of water, and the canal,
belong to the owner of the country in which they are formed. For the
boundaries are easily ascertained: and we arenot topresumeanintention
of relinquishing so considerable a tract of land in case of its happening
to be invaded by the waters of an adjoining lake.
It must be observed that we here treat the question as arising between
two states: it is to be decided by other principles when it relates to pro-
prietors who are members of the same state. In the latter case, it is not
merely the bounds of the soil, but also its nature and use, that determine
the possession of it. An individual, who possesses a ﬁeld on the borders
of a lake, cannot enjoy it as a ﬁeld when it is overﬂowed; and a person
who has, for instance, the right of ﬁshing in the lake, may exert his right
in this new extent: if the waters retire, the ﬁeld is restored to <125> the


chapter xxiii
249
use of its former owner. If the lake penetrates by an opening into the
low lands in its neighbourhood, and there forms a permanent inunda-
tion, this new lake belongs to the public, because all lakes belong to the
public.
The same principles shew, that if the lake insensibly forms an acces-
sion of land on its banks, either by retiring or in any other manner, this
increase of land belongs to the country which it joins,whenthatcountry
has no other boundary than the lake. It is the same thing as alluvion on
the banks of a river.
But if the lake happened to be suddenly dried up, either totally or in
a great part of it, the bed would remain in thepossessionof thesovereign
of the lake; the nature of the soil, so easily known, sufﬁciently marking
out the limits.
The empire or jurisdiction over lakes and rivers is subject to the same
rules as the property of them, in all the cases which we have examined.
Each state naturally possesses it over the whole or the part, of which it
possesses the domain. We have seen (§245) that the nation, or its sov-
ereign, commands in all places in its possession.
chapter xxiii
Of the Sea.
In order to complete the exposition of the principles of the law of na-
tions with respect to the things a nation may possess, it remains to treat
of the open sea. The use of the open sea consists in navigation, and in
ﬁshing; along its coasts it is moreover of use for the procuring of several
things found near the shore, such as shell-ﬁsh, amber, pearls, &c. for the
making of salt, and, ﬁnally, for the establishment of places of retreatand
security for vessels.
The open sea is notof sucha natureastoadmittheholdingpossession
of it, since no settlement can be formed on it, so as to hinder othersfrom
passing. But a nation powerful at sea may forbid others to ﬁsh in it and
to navigate it, declaring that she appropriates to herself the dominion
§276. Land
formed on
the banks
of a lake.
§277. Bed of a
lake dried up.
§278. Jurisdic-
tion over lakes
and rivers.
§279. The sea
and its use.
§280. Whether
the sea can be
possessed, and
its dominion
appropriated.


250
book i: nations in themselves
over it, and that she will destroy the vessels that shall dare to appear in
it without her permission. Let us see whether she has right to do this.
It is manifest that the use of the open sea, which consists in navigation
and ﬁshing, is innocent and inexhaustible; that is to say—he who navi-
gates or ﬁshes in the open sea, does no injury to any one, and the sea, in
these two respects, is sufﬁcient for all mankind. Now nature does notgive
to man a right of appropriating to himself things that may be innocently
used, and that are inexhaustible, and sufﬁcient for all. For since those
things, while common to all, are sufﬁcient to supply the wants of each,—
whoever should, to the exclusion of all other participants, attempt to ren-
der himself sole proprietor of them, would unreasonably <126> wrestthe
bounteous gifts of nature from the parties excluded. The earth no longer
furnishing without culture the things necessary or useful to the human
race, who were extremely multiplied, it became necessary tointroducethe
right of property, in order that each might apply himself with more suc-
cess to the cultivation of what had fallen to his share, and multiply by his
labour the necessaries and conveniences of life. It is for this reason thelaw
of nature approves the rights of dominion and property, which put an
end to the primitive manner of living in common. But this reasoncannot
apply to things which are in themselves inexhaustible; and consequently
it cannot furnish any just grounds for seizing the exclusive possession of
them. If the free and common use of a thing of thisnaturewasprejudicial
or dangerous to a nation, the care of their own safety would authorise
them to reduce that thing under their own dominion if possible, in order
to restrict the use of it by such precautions as prudence might dictate to
them. But this is not the case with the open sea, on which people may sail
and ﬁsh without theleastprejudicetoanypersonwhatsoever,andwithout
putting any one in danger. No nation therefore has a right to take pos-
session of the open sea, or claim the sole use of it, to the exclusion of
other nations. The kings of Portugal formerly arrogated tothemselvesthe
empire of the seas of Guinea and the East-Indies;*buttheothermaritime
powers gave themselves little trouble about such a pretension.
* See Grotius’s Mare Liberum, and Selden’s Mare Clausum, lib. i. cap. xvii.
§281. Nobody
has a right to
appropriate to
himself the
use of the
open sea.


chapter xxiii
251
The right of navigating and ﬁshing in the open sea being then a right
common to all men, the nation that attempts to exclude another from
that advantage, does her an injury, and furnishes her with sufﬁcient
grounds for commencing hostilities, since nature authorises a nation to
repel an injury,—that is, to make use of force against whoever would
deprive her of her rights.
Nay more,—a nation, which, without a legitimate claim, would ar-
rogate to itself an exclusive right to the sea, and support its pretensions
by force, does an injury to all nations; it infringes their common right;
and they are justiﬁable in forming a general combination against it, in
order to repress such an attempt. Nations have the greatest interest in
causing the law of nations, which is the basis of their tranquillity, to be
universally respected. If any one openly tramples it under foot, they all
may and ought to rise up against him; and, by uniting their forces to
chastise the common enemy, they will discharge their duty towards
themselves, and towards human society, of which they are members
(Prelim. §22).
However, as every one is at liberty to renounce his right, a nation may
acquire exclusive rights of navigation and ﬁshing, by treaties, in which
other nations renounce, in its favour, the rights they derive from nature.
The latter are obliged to observe their treaties; and the nation they have
favoured has a right to maintain by forcethepossessionof itsadvantages.
Thus the <127> house of Austria has renounced, in favour of England
and Holland, the right of sending vessels from the Netherlands to the
East-Indies. In Grotius, de Jure Belli & Pacis, Lib. II. Cap. III. §15, may
be found many instances of similar treaties.
As the rights of navigation and of ﬁshing, and otherrightswhichmay
be exercised on the sea, belong to the class of those rights of mere ability
(jura merae facultatis) which are imprescriptible (§95),—they cannotbe
lost for want of use. Consequently, although a nation should happen to
have been, from time immemorial, in sole possession of the navigation
or ﬁshery in certain seas, it cannot, on thisfoundation,claimanexclusive
right to those advantages. For though others have not made use of their
common right to navigation and ﬁshery in those seas, it does not thence
§282. The
nation that
attempts
to exclude
another, does
it an injury.
§283. It even
does an injury
to all nations.
§284. It may
acquire an
exclusive right
by treaties,
§285. but not
by prescription
and long use,

252
chapter v
Of States Elective, Successive or Hereditary,
and of those called Patrimonial.
56. Elective states,
23
57. Whether elective kings be real sovereigns,
24
58. Successive and hereditary states:—origin of the
right of succession,
24
59. Other origin of that right, <xxiv>
24
60. Other sources, which still amount to the
same thing,
24
61. A nation may change the order of the succession,
24
62. Renunciations,
25
63. The order of succession ought commonly to
be observed,
26
64. Regents,
27
65. Indivisibility of sovereignties,
27
66. Who are to decide disputes respecting the
succession to a sovereignty,
27
67. The right of succession not to depend on the
judgment of a foreign power,
29
68. States called patrimonial,
30
69. Every true sovereignty is unalienable,
31
70. Duty of a prince who is empowered to nominate
his successor,
32
71. His nomination must be sanctioned by at least the
tacit ratiﬁcation of the people,
32


original contents
25
chapter vi
Principal Objects of a good Government; and ﬁrst,
to provide for the Necessities of the Nation.
Sect. 72. The object of society points out the duties
of the sovereign:—he is bound to procure
plenty,
page 33
73. to take care that there be a sufﬁcient number
of workmen,
33
74. to prevent the emigration of those that are useful,
33
75. Emissaries who entice them away,
34
76. Labour and industry must be encouraged,
34
chapter vii
Of the Cultivation of the Soil.
77. Utility of Agriculture,
34
78. Regulations necessary in that respect:—for the
distribution of land,
34
79. for the protection of husbandmen,
35
80. Husbandry ought to be placed in an
honourable light,
35
81. Cultivation of the soil a natural obligation,
35
82. Public granaries,
36
chapter viii
Of Commerce.
83. Domestic and foreign trade,
37
84. Utility of domestic trade,
37
85. Utility of foreign trade,
37
86. Obligation to cultivate domestic trade, <xxv>
37
87. Obligation to carry on foreign trade,
38
88. Foundation of the laws of commerce:—right
of purchasing,
38
89. Right of selling,
38
90. Prohibition of foreign merchandises,
39
91. Nature of the right of purchasing,
39
92. Each nation to determine for herself how she will
carry on commerce,
39
93. How a nation acquires a perfect right to a
foreign trade,
40
94. Simple permission to carry on trade,
40


26
original contents
Sect. 95. Whether commercial rights be subject
to prescription,
page 40
96. Imprescriptibility of rights founded on treaty,
41
97. Monopolies, and trading companies with
exclusive privileges,
42
98. Balance of trade, and attention of government in
that respect,
43
99. Import duties,
43
chapter ix
Of the Care of the public Ways; and of Tolls.
100. Utility of highways, canals, &c.
43
101. Duty of government in that respect,
43
102. Its rights in that respect,
44
103. Foundation of the right to demand toll,
44
104. Abuse of that right,
44
chapter x
Of Money and Exchange.
105. Establishment of money,
45
106. Duty of the nation or prince with respect to
the coin,
45
107. Their rights in that respect,
46
108. How one nation may injure another in the article
of coin,
47
109. Exchange, and commercial laws,
47
chapter xi
Second Object of a good Government,—to procure
the true Happiness of a Nation.
110. A nation is bound to labour after her
own happiness,
47
111. Instruction,
47
112. Education of youth,
48
113. Arts and sciences,
48
114. Freedom of philosophical discussion,
49
115. Love of virtue, and abhorrence of vice, to
be excited,
51

original contents
27
Sect. 116. The nation may hence discover the intention
of her rulers,
page 51
117. The nation, or public person, bound to perfect her
understanding and will, <xxvi>
52
118. and to direct the knowledge and virtues of the
citizens to the welfare of the society,
52
119. Love for their country,
53
120. in individuals,
53
121. in the nation or state itself, and in the sovereign,
53
122. Deﬁnition of the term, “country,”
53
123. How shameful and criminal to injure our country,
54
124. The glory of good citizens.—Examples,
54
chapter xii
Of Piety and Religion.
125. Piety,
55
126. It ought to be attended with knowledge,
55
127. Religion, internal and external,
56
128. Rights of individuals:—liberty of conscience,
56
129. Public establishment of religion:—rights and
duties of the nation,
56
130. when there is as yet no established religion,
57
131. when there is an established religion,
57
132. Duties and rights of the sovereign with respect
to religion,
58
133. where there is an established religion,
59
134. Objects of his care, and the means he ought
to employ,
60
135. Toleration,
60
136. How the prince is to act when the nation is
resolved to change her religion,
60
137. Difference of religion does not deprive a prince of
his crown,
61
138. Duties and rights of the sovereign reconciled with
those of the subjects,
61
139. The sovereign ought to have the inspection of the
affairs of religion, and authority over those who
teach it,
62
140. He is bound to prevent the abuse of the
established religion,
63
141. His authority over the ministers of religion,
63


28
original contents
Sect. 142. Nature of that authority,
page 64
143. Rule to be observed with respect to ecclesiastics,
64
144. Recapitulation of the reasons which establish the
sovereign’s rights in matters of religion, 64—
Authorities and examples,
65
145. Pernicious consequences of the contrary opinion,
65
146. Abuses particularised.—1. The power of the popes,
66
147. 2. Important employments conferred by a
foreign power,
68
148. 3. Powerful subjects dependent on a foreign court,
68
149. 4. Celibacy of the priests:—Convents,
69
150. 5. Enormous pretensions of the clergy:—
Pre-eminence,
70
151. 6. Independence, immunities,
71
152. 7. Immunity of church possessions,
72
153. 8. Excommunication of men in ofﬁce,
73
154. 9. and of sovereigns themselves,
74
155. 10. The clergy drawing every thing to themselves,
and interrupting the course of justice, <xxvii>
75
156. 11. Money drawn to Rome,
76
157. 12. Laws and customs inimical to the welfare
of states,
76
chapter xiii
Of Justice and Polity.
158. A nation is bound to make justice ﬂourish,
77
159. to establish good laws,
77
160. to enforce them,
78
161. Functions and duties of the prince in that respect,
78
162. How he is to dispense justice,
78
163. His duty to appoint upright and enlightened
judges,
78
164. The ordinary courts should determine causes
relating to the revenue,
79
165. Necessary to establish supreme courts, from whose
sentence there shall be no appeal,
79
166. The prince bound to observe the forms of justice,
80
167. to support the authority of the judges, and enforce
their decrees,
80
168. Distributive justice:—distribution of
employments and rewards,
80


original contents
29
Sect. 169. Punishment of transgressors:—foundation of the
right of punishing,
page 81
170. Criminal laws,
81
171. Degree of punishment,
82
172. Execution of the laws,
82
173. Right of pardoning,
83
174. Internal police,
83
175. Duel or single combat,
84
176. Means of putting a stop to that disorder,
84
chapter xiv
Third Object of a good Government,—
to fortify itself against external Attacks.
177. A nation ought to fortify herself against external
attacks,
87
178. National strength,
87
179. Increase of population,
87
180. Valour,
88
181. Other military virtues,
89
182. Riches,
89
183. Public revenues and taxes,
90
184. The nation ought not to increase her power by
unlawful means,
90
185. Power is but relative, <xxviii>
90
chapter xv
Of the Glory of a Nation.
186. Advantages of glory,
91
187. Duty of the nation.—How true glory is acquired,
91
188. Duty of the prince,
91
189. Duty of the citizens,
92
190. Example of the Swiss,
92
191. Attacking the glory of a nation is doing her an
injury,
93
chapter xvi
Protection sought by a Nation, and her voluntary
Submission to a Foreign Power.
192. Protection,
93
193. Voluntary submission of one nation to another,
94


30
original contents
Sect. 194. Several kinds of submission,
page 94
195. Right of the citizens when the nation submits
to a foreign power,
94
196. These compacts annulled by the failure
of protection,
95
197. or by the inﬁdelity of the party protected,
95
198. and by the encroachments of the protector,
95
199. How the right of the nation protected is lost by
her silence,
96
book i: nations in themselves
follow that they have had any intention to renounce it; and they are
entitled to exert it whenever they think proper.
But it may happen, that the non-usage of the right may assume the
nature of a consent or tacit agreement, and thus become a title in favour
of one nation against another. When a nation, that is in possession of
the navigation and ﬁshery in certain tracts of sea, claims an exclusive
right to them, and forbids all participation on the part of other na-
tions,—if the others obey that prohibition with sufﬁcient marks of ac-
quiescence, they tacitly renounce their own right, in favour of that na-
tion, and establish for her a new right, which shemay afterwardslawfully
maintain against them, especially when it is conﬁrmed by long use.
The various uses of the sea near the coasts render it very susceptible
of property. It furnishes ﬁsh, shells, pearls, amber, &c. Now in all these
respects its use is not inexhaustible; wherefore the nation to whom the
coasts belong may appropriate to themselves, and convert to their own
proﬁt, an advantage which nature has so placed within their reach as to
enable them conveniently to take possession of it, in the same manner
as they possessed themselves of the dominion of the land they inhabit.
Who can doubt, that the pearl ﬁsheries of Bahrem and Ceylon may law-
fully become property? And though, where the catching of ﬁsh is the
only object, the ﬁshery appears less liable to be exhausted,—yet if a na-
tion have on their coast a particular ﬁshery of a proﬁtable nature, and
of which they may become masters, shall they not be permitted to ap-
propriate to themselves that bounteous gift of nature, as an appendage
to the country they possess, and to reserve to themselves the great ad-
vantages which their commerce may thence derive in case there be a
sufﬁcient abundance of ﬁsh to furnish the neighbouring nations? But if,
so far from taking possession of it, the nation has once acknowledged
the common right of other nations to come and ﬁsh there, it can no
longer exclude them from it; it has left that ﬁshery in its primitive free-
dom, at least with respect to those who have been accustomed to take
advantage of it. The English not having originally taken exclusive pos-
session of the herring-ﬁshery on their coasts, it is become common to
them with other nations. <128>
§286. unless
by virtue
of a tacit
agreement.
§287. The sea
near the coasts
may become
a property.


chapter xxiii
253
A nation may appropriate to herself those things, of which the free
and common use would be prejudicial or dangerous to her. This is a
second reason for which governments extend their dominion over the
sea along their coasts, as far as they are able to protect their right. It is
of considerable importance to the safety and welfare of the state, that a
general liberty be not allowed to all comers to approach so near their
possessions, especially with ships of war, as to hinder the approach of
trading nations, and molest their navigation. During the war between
Spain and the United Provinces,81 James I. king of England,82 marked
out, along his coasts, certain boundaries within which he declared that
he would not suffer any of the powers at war to pursue their enemies,
nor even allow their armed vessels to stop and observe the ships that
should enter or sail out of the ports.* These parts of the sea, thus sub-
ject to a nation, are comprehended in her territory; nor must any one
navigate them without her consent. But to vessels that are not liable to
suspicion, she cannot, without a breach of duty, refuse permission to
approach for harmless purposes, since it is a duty incumbent on every
proprietor to allow to strangers a free passage, even by land, when it
may be done without damage or danger. It is true, that the state itself
is sole judge of what is proper to be done in every particular case that
occurs: and if it judges amiss, it is to blame; but the others are bound
to submit. It is otherwise, however, in cases of necessity,—as, for in-
stance, when a vessel is obliged to enter a road which belongs to you,
in order to shelter herself from a tempest. In this case, the right of
entering wherever we can, provided we cause no damage, or that we
repair any damage done, is, as we shall shew more at large, a remnant
of the primitive freedom, of which no man can be supposed to have
divested himself; and the vessel may lawfully enter in spite of you, if
you unjustly refuse her permission.
* Selden’s Mare Clausum, Lib. II.
81. 1566–1648.
§288. Another
reason for
appropriat-
ing the sea
bordering on
the coasts.
82. James I of England (r. 1603–25) also ruled as James VI of Scotland (r. 1567–
1625).


254
book i: nations in themselves
It is not easy to determine to what distance a nation may extend its
rights over the sea by which it is surrounded. Bodinus* pretends, that,
according to the common right of all maritime nations, the prince’s do-
minion extends to the distance of thirty leagues from the coast. But this
exact determination can only be founded on a general consent of na-
tions, which it would be difﬁcult to prove. Each state may, on this head,
make what regulations it pleases, so far as respects the transactions of
the citizens with each other, or their concerns with the sovereign: but
between nation and nation, all that can reasonably be said, is, that, in
general, the dominion of the state over the neigbouring sea extends as
far as her safety renders it necessary and her power is able to assert it;
since, on the one hand, she cannot appropriate to herself a thing that is
common to all mankind, such as the sea, except so far as she has need
of it for some lawful end (§281), and, on the other, it would be a vain
and ridiculous pre-<129>tension to claim a right which she were wholly
unable to assert. The ﬂeets of England have given room to her kings to
claim the empire of the seas which surround that island, even as far as
the opposite coasts.† Selden relates a solemn act‡ by which it appears
that, in the time of Edward I.83 that empire was acknowledged by the
greatest part of the maritime nations of Europe; and the republic of the
United Provinces acknowledged it, in some measure, by the treaty of
Breda in 1667, at least so far as related to the honours of the ﬂag. But
solidly to establish a right of such extent, it were necessary to prove very
clearly the express or tacit consent of all the powers concerned. The
French have never agreed to this pretension of England; and in that very
treaty of Breda, just mentioned, Louis XIV. would not even suffer the
Channel to be called the English Channel, or the British Sea. The re-
public of Venice claims the empire of the Adriatic; and every body
knows the ceremony annually performed upon that account. In conﬁr-
* In his Republic, Book I. Chap. X.
† See Selden’s Mare Clausum.
‡ Ibid. lib. ii, cap. xxviii.
83. Edward I, king of England, r. 1272–1307.
§289. How far
this possession
may extend.


chapter xxiii
255
mation of this right, we are referred totheexamplesof Uladislaus,84king
of Naples, of the emperor Frederic III.85 and of some of the kings of
Hungary, who asked permission of the Venetians for their vessels topass
through that sea.* That the empire of the Adriatic belongs to the re-
public to a certain distance from her own coasts, in the places of which
she can keep possession, and of which the possession is important toher
own safety,—appears to me incontestable: but I doubt very much
whether any power is at present disposed to acknowledgehersovereignty
over the whole Adriatic sea. Such pretensions to empire are respected as
long as the nation that makes them is able to assert them by force; but
they vanish of course on the decline of her power. At present the whole
space of the sea within cannon-shot of the coast is considered as making
a part of theterritory; and forthatreasonavesseltakenunderthecannon
of a neutral fortress is not a lawful prize.
The shores of the sea incontestably belongto thenationthatpossesses
the country of which they are a part; and they belong to the class of
public things. If civilians have set them down as things common to all
mankind (res communes), it is only in regard to their use; and we are not
thence to conclude that they considered them as independent of the
empire: the very contrary appears from a great number of laws. Ports
and harbours are manifestly an appendage to and even a part of the
country, and consequently are the property of the nation. Whatever is
said of the land itself, will equally apply to them, so far as respects the
consequences of the domain and of the empire.
All we have said of the parts of the sea near the coast, may be saidmore
particularly, and with much greater reason, of roads, bays, and straits, as
still more capable of being possessed, and of greater importance to the
safety of the country. But I speakof <130>baysandstraitsof smallextent,
and not of those great tracts of sea to which these names are sometimes
given,asHudson’sBayandtheStraitsof Magellan,overwhichtheempire
cannot extend, and still less a right of property. A bay whose entrancecan
* Ibid. lib. i. cap. xvi.
84. Uladislaus (Ladislaus), king of Naples, r. 1386–1414.
85. Frederic III, Holy Roman Emperor, r. 1452–93.
§290. Shores
and ports.
§291. Bays
and straits.


256
book i: nations in themselves
be defended, may be possessed and rendered subject to the laws of the
sovereign; and it is of importance that it should be so, since the country
might be much more easily insulted in such a place, than on a coast that
lies exposed to the winds and the impetuosity of the waves.
It must be remarked with regard to straits, that, when they serve for
a communication between two seas, the navigation of whichis common
to all or several nations, the nation which possesses the strait, cannot
refuse the others a passage through it, provided that passagebeinnocent,
and attended with no danger to herself. By refusing it without just rea-
sons, she would deprive those nations of an advantage granted them by
nature; and indeed the right to such a passage is a remnant of the prim-
itive liberty enjoyed by all mankind. Nothing but the care of his own
safety can authorise the owner of the strait to make use of certain pre-
cautions, and to require certain formalities, commonly established by
the custom of nations. He has arighttolevy amoderatetaxonthevessels
that pass, partly on account of the inconveniencethey givehimbyoblig-
ing him to be on his guard,—partly as a return for the safety he procures
them by protecting them from their enemies, by keeping pirates at a
distance, and by defraying the expense attendantonthesupportof light-
houses, sea-marks, and other things necessary to the safety of mariners.
Thus the king of Denmark requires a custom at the straits of theSound.
Such right ought to be founded on the same reasons, and subject to the
same rules, as the tolls established on land or on a river. (See §§103 and
104.)
It is necessary to mention the right to wrecks,—a right which was the
wretched offspring of barbarism, and which has almost every-wherefor-
tunately disappeared with its parent. Justice and humanity cannot allow
of it except in those cases only where the proprietors of the effects saved
from a wreck cannot possibly be discovered. In such cases, those effects
belong to the person who is the ﬁrst to take possession of them, or to
the sovereign, if the law reserves them for him.
If a sea is entirely inclosed by the territories of a nation, and has no
other communication with the ocean than by a channel of which that
nation may take possession, it appears that such a sea is no less capable
of being occupied, and becoming property, than the land; and it ought
§292. Straits
in particular.
§293. Right
to wrecks.
§294. A sea
inclosed
within the
territories
of a nation.


chapter xxiii
257
to follow the fate of the country that surrounds it. The Mediterranean,
in former times, was absolutely inclosed within the territories of theRo-
mans; and that people, by rendering themselves masters of the strait
which joins it to the ocean, might subject the Mediterranean to their
empire, and assume the dominion over it. They did not, by such pro-
cedure, injure the rights of other nations; a particular sea being mani-
<131>festly designed by nature for the use of the countries and nations
that surround it. Besides, by barring the entrance of the Mediterranean
against all suspected vessels, the Romans, by one single stroke, secured
the immense extent of their coasts: and this reason was sufﬁcient to au-
thorise them to take possession of it. And as it had absolutely no com-
munication but with the states which belonged to them, they were at
liberty to permit or prohibit the entrance into it, in the same manner as
into any of their towns or provinces.
When a nation takes possession of certain parts of the sea, it takes
possession of the empire over them, as well as of the domain, on the
same principle which we advanced in treating of the land (§205). These
parts of the sea are within the jurisdiction of the nation, and a part of
its territory: the sovereign commands there; he makes laws, and may
punish those who violate them: in a word, he has the same rights there
as on land, and, in general, every right which the laws of the state allow
him.
It is however true that the empire, and the domain or property, are not
inseparable in their own nature, even in a sovereign state.* As a nation
may possess the domain or property of a tract of land or sea without
having the sovereignty of it, so it may likewise happen that she shall
possess the sovereignty of a place, of which the property or the domain,
with respect to use, belongs to some other nation. But it is always pre-
sumed, that when a nation possesses the useful domain of any place
whatsoever, she has also the higher domain and empire, or the sover-
eignty (§205). We cannot, however, from the possession of the empire,
infer with equal probability a co-existent possession of the useful do-
main; for a nation may have good reasons for claiming the empire over
* See Book II. §83.
§295. The
parts of the
sea possessed
by a power
are within its
jurisdiction.

258
book i: nations in themselves
a country, and particularly over a tract of sea, withoutpretendingtohave
any property in it, or any useful domain. The Englishhaveneverclaimed
the property of all the seas over which they have claimed the empire.
This is all we have to say in this ﬁrst book. A more minute detail of
the duties and rights of a nation, considered in herself would lead us
too far. Such detail must, as we have already observed, be sought for in
particular treatises on the public and political law. We are very far from
ﬂattering ourselves that we have omitted no important article: this is a
slight sketch of an immense picture: but an intelligent reader will with-
out difﬁculty supply all our omissions by making a proper application
of the general principles: we have taken the utmost care solidly to es-
tablish those principles, and to develop them with precision and per-
spicuity. <132> <133>


259
the
LAW
of
NATIONS
u
b o o k i i
u
Of a Nation considered in
its Relations to others
chapter i
Of the Common Duties of a Nation towards others,
or of the Ofﬁces of Humanity between Nations.
The following maxims will appear very strange to cabinet politicians:
and such is the misfortune of mankind, that, to many of those reﬁned
conductors of nations, the doctrine of this chapter will be a subject of
ridicule. Be it so!—but we will nevertheless boldly lay down what the
law of nature prescribes to nations. Shall we be intimidated by ridicule,
when we speak after Cicero? That great man held the reins of the most
powerful state that ever existed; and in that station he appeared no less
eminent than at the bar. The punctual observance of the law of nature
he considered as the most salutary policy to the state. In my preface, I
have already quoted this ﬁne passage: Nihil est quod adhuc de republica
putem dictum, & quo possim longius progredi, nisi sit conﬁrmatum, non
modo falsum esse illud, sine injuria non posse, sed hoc verissimum, sine
§1. Founda-
tion of the
common and
mutual duties
of nations.


260
book ii: nations in relation to other states
summa justitia rempublicam regi non posse.*1 I might say on good
grounds, that, by the words, summa justitia, Cicero means thatuniversal
justice which consists in completely fulﬁlling the law of nature. But in
another place he explains himself more clearly on this head, and gives
us sufﬁciently to understand that he does not conﬁne <134> the mutual
duties of men to the observance of justice, properly so called. “Noth-
ing,” says he, “is more agreeable to nature, more capable of affording
true satisfaction, than, in imitation of Hercules, to undertake even the
most arduous and painful labours for the beneﬁt and preservation of
all nations.” Magis est secundum naturam, pro omnibus gentibus, si ﬁeri
possit, conservandis aut juvandis, maximos labores molestiasque suscipere,
imitantem Herculem illum, quem hominum fama, beneﬁciorum memor,
in concilium coelestium collocavit, quam vivere in solitudine, non modo
sine ullis molestiis, sed etiam in maximis voluptatibus, abundantem om-
nibus copiis, ut excellas etiam pulchritudine & viribus. Quocirca optimo
quisque & splendidissimo ingenio longe illam vitam huic anteponit.†2 In
the same chapter, Cicero expressly refutes those who are for excluding
foreigners from the beneﬁt of those duties to which they acknowledge
themselves bound towards their fellow citizens. Qui autem civium ra-
tionem dicunt habendam, externorum negant, hi dirimunt communem
humani generis societatem; qua sublata, beneﬁcentia, liberalitas, bonitas,
justitia, funditus tollitur: quae qui tollunt, etiam adversus Deos immor-
* Fragm. ex lib. ii. De Republica.
† De Ofﬁciis lib. iii. cap. 5.
1. “A state cannot be happily governed without committing injustice; without a
strict attention to the most rigid justice, public affairs cannot be advantageously ad-
ministered.” Cicero, Fragment. Ex lib. ii De republica (see also preface, p. 19).
2. “It is more in accord with Nature to emulate the great Hercules and undergo
the greatest toil and trouble for the sake of aiding or saving the world, if possible,
than to live in seclusion, not only free from all care but also reveling in pleasures and
abounding in wealth, while excelling others also in beauty and strength. Thus Her-
cules denied himself and underwent toil and tribulation for the world, and, out of
gratitude for his services, popular belief has given him a place in the council of gods.
The better and more noble therefore the character with which a man is endowed, the
more does he prefer the life of service to the life of pleasure.” Cicero, De ofﬁciis
III.v.25.


chapter i
261
tales impii judicandi sunt; ab iis enim constitutam inter homines socie-
tatem evertunt. 3
And why should we not hope still to ﬁnd, among those who are at
the head of affairs, some wise individuals, who are convinced of this
great truth, that virtue is, even for sovereigns and political bodies, the
most certain road to prosperity and happiness? There is at least one ben-
eﬁt to be expected from the open assertion and publication of sound
maxims, which is, that even those who relish them the least, are thereby
laid under a necessity of keeping within some bounds, lest they should
forfeit their characters altogether. To ﬂatter ourselves with the vain ex-
pectation that men, and especially men in power, will be inclinedstrictly
to conform to the laws of nature, would be a gross mistake; and to re-
nounce all hope of making impression on some of them, would be to
give up mankind for lost.
Nations being obliged by nature reciprocally to cultivate human so-
ciety (Prelim. §11), are bound to observe towards each other all theduties
which the safety and advantage of that society require.
The ofﬁces of humanity are those succours, those duties, which men
owe to each other, as men, that is, as social beings formed to live in
society, and standing in need of mutual assistance for their preservation
and happiness, and to enable them to live in a manner conformable to
their nature. Now the laws of nature being no less obligatory on nations
than on individuals (Prelim. §5), whatever duties each man owestoother
men, the same does each nation, in its way, owe to other nations(Prelim.
§10, &c.). Such is the foundation of those common duties,—of those
ofﬁces of humanity,—to which nations are reciprocally bound towards
each other. They consist, generally, in do-<135>ing every thing in our
power for the preservation and happiness of others, as far as such con-
duct is reconcilable with our duties towards ourselves.
3. “Others again who say that regard should be had for the rightsof fellowcitizens,
but not for foreigners, would destroy the universal brotherhood of mankind; and,
when this is annihilated, kindness, generosity, goodness, and justice must utterlyper-
ish; and those who work all this destruction must be considered as wickedly rebelling
against the immortal gods. For they uproot the fellowship between humans.”Cicero,
De ofﬁciis III.vi.28.
§2. Ofﬁces
of humanity,
and their
foundation.


262
book ii: nations in relation to other states
The nature and essence of man—who, without the assistance of his
fellow men, is unable to supply all his wants, to preserve himself, to ren-
der himself perfect, and to live happily—plainly shews us that he is des-
tined to live in society, in the interchange of mutual aid,—and, conse-
quently, that all men are, by their very nature and essence, obliged to
unite their common efforts for the perfection of their own being and
that of their condition. The surest method of succeeding in this pursuit
is, that each individual should exert his efforts, ﬁrst for himself, andthen
for others. Hence it follows that whatever we owe to ourselves, we like-
wise owe to others, so far as they stand in need of assistance, and we can
grant it to them without being wanting to ourselves. Since then one na-
tion, in its way, owes to another nation every duty that one man owes
to another man, we may conﬁdently lay down this general principle:—
One state owes to another state whatever it owes to itself, so far as that
other stands in real need of its assistance, and the former can grant it
without neglecting the duties it owes to itself. Such is the eternal and
immutable law of nature. Those who might be alarmed at this doctrine,
as totally subversive of the maxims of sound policy, will be relievedfrom
their apprehensions by the two following considerations—
1. Social bodies or sovereign states are much more capable of supply-
ing all their wants than individual men are; and mutual assistance is not
so necessary among them, nor so frequently required. Now, in those
particulars which a nation can itself perform, no succour is due to it
from others.
2. The duties of a nation towards itself, and chieﬂy the care of itsown
safety, require much more circumspection and reserve, than need be ob-
served by an individual in giving assistance to others. This remark we
shall soon illustrate.
Of all the duties of a nation towards itself the chief object is its pres-
ervation and perfection, together with that of its state. The detail given
of them in the ﬁrst book of this work may serve to point out the several
objects in relation to which a state may and should assist another state.
Every nationought,onoccasion,tolabourforthepreservationof others,
and for securing them from ruin and destruction, as far as it can do this,
without exposing itself too much. Thus, when a neighbouring nation is
§3. General
principle of all
the mutual
duties of
nations.
§4. Duties of a
nation for the
preservation
of others.


chapter i
263
unjustly attacked by a powerful enemy who threatens to oppress it,—if
you can defend it without exposing yourself to great danger, unques-
tionably it is your duty to do so. Let it not be said, in objection to this,
that a sovereign is not to expose the lives of his soldiers, for the safety
of a foreign nation with which he has not contractedadefensivealliance.
It may be his own case to stand in need of assistance; and consequently
he is acting for the safety of his own nation, in giving energy to the spirit
<136> and disposition to afford mutual aid. Accordingly, policy here
coincides with and enforces obligation and duty. It is the interest of
princes to stop the progress of an ambitious monarch who aims at ag-
grandisinghimself bysubjugatinghisneighbours.Apowerfulleaguewas
formed in favour of the United Provinces, when threatened with the
yoke of Lewis XIV.* When the Turks laid siege to Vienna, the brave
Sobieski king of Poland saved the house of Austria,† and possibly all
Germany, and his own kingdom.4
For the same reason, if a nation is afﬂicted with famine, all thosewho
have provisions to spare ought to relieve her distress, without however
exposing themselves to want. But if that nation is able to pay for the
provisions thus furnished, it is perfectly lawful to sell them to her at a
reasonable rate; for they are not bound to furnish her with what she is
herself capable of procuring; and consequently there is no obligationof
gratuitously bestowing on her such things as she is able to purchase. To
give assistance in such extreme necessity is so essentially conformable to
humanity, that the duty is seldom neglected by any nation that has re-
ceived the slightest polish of civilisation. The great Henry the Fourth5
could not forbear to comply with it in favour of obstinate rebels who
were bent on his destruction.‡
Whatever be the calamity with which a nation is afﬂicted, the like
assistance is due to it. We have seen little states in Switzerland order
* In 1672.
† He defeated the Turks, and obliged them to raise the siege of Vienna, in 1683.
‡ At the famous siege of Paris [[1590]].
4. Jan III Sobieski (r. 1674–99) defeated the Turks in 1683 at the battle of Vienna,
ending a two-month seige by the Ottoman Empire army.
5. Henry IV, king of France, r. 1589–1610.
§5. It ought
to assist a
nation afﬂicted
with famine
or any other
calamities.

264
book ii: nations in relation to other states
public collections to be made in behalf of towns or villages of theneigh-
bouring countries, which had been ruined by ﬁre, and remit themliberal
succours; the difference of religion proving no bar to the performance
of so humane a deed. The calamities of Portugal have given England an
opportunity of fulﬁlling the duties of humanity with that noble gen-
erosity which characterises a great nation. On the ﬁrst intelligenceof the
disastrous fate of Lisbon,*6 the parliament voted a hundred thousand
pounds sterling for the relief of an unfortunate people; the king also
added considerable sums: ships, laden with provisions and all kinds of
succours, were sent away with the utmost dispatch; and theirarrivalcon-
vinced the Portuguese, that an opposition in belief and worship does
not restrain the beneﬁcence of those who understand the claims of hu-
manity. On the same occasion likewise the king of Spain signally dis-
played his tendernessforanearally,andexertedinaconspicuousmanner
his humanity and generosity.
A nation must not simply conﬁne itself to the preservation of other
states; it should likewise, according to its power and their want of its
assistance, contribute to their perfection. We have already shewn (Pre-
lim. §13) that natural society imposes on it this general obligation. We
are now come to the proper place <137> for treating of the obligation
somewhat more in detail. A state is more or less perfect, as it is more or
less adapted to attain the end of civil society, which consistsinprocuring
for its members every thing of which they stand in need, for the neces-
sities, the conveniences and enjoyments of life, and for their happiness
in general,—in providing for the peaceful enjoyment of property, and
the safe and easy administration of justice,—and, ﬁnally, in defending
itself against all foreign violence (Book I. §15). Every nation therefore
should occasionally, and according to its power, contribute, not only to
put another nation in possession of these advantages, but likewise to
render it capable of procuring them itself. Accordingly, alearnednation,
if applied to for masters and teachers in the sciences, by another nation
desirous of shaking off its native barbarism, ought not to refuse such a
* The earthquake by which a great part of that city was destroyed.
6. The Lisbon earthquake struck on November 1, All Saints’ Day, 1755.
§6. It ought to
contribute to
the perfection
of other states.


chapter i
265
request. A nation whose happiness it is to live under wise laws, should,
on occasion, make it a point of duty to communicate them. Thus when
the wise and virtuous Romans sent ambassadors to Greece to collect
good laws, the Greeks were far from rejecting so reasonable and so laud-
able a request.
But though a nation be obliged to promote, as far as lies in its power,
the perfection of others, it is not entitled forcibly to obtrude these good
ofﬁces on them. Such an attempt would be a violation of their natural
liberty. In order to compel any one to receive a kindness, we must have
an authority over him; but nations are absolutely free and independent
(Prelim. §4). Those ambitious Europeans who attacked the American
nations, and subjected them to their greedy dominion, in order, as they
pretended, to civilise them, and cause them to be instructed in the true
religion,—those usurpers, I say, grounded themselves on a pretext
equally unjust and ridiculous. It is strange to hear the learned and ju-
dicious Grotius assert, that a sovereign may justly take up arms to chas-
tise nations which are guilty of enormous transgressions of the law of
nature, which treat their parents with inhumanity like the Sogdians, which
eat human ﬂesh as the ancient Gauls, &c.* What led him into this error,
was his attributing to every independent man, and of course to every
sovereign, an odd kind of right to punish faults which involve an enor-
mous violation of the laws of nature, though they do not affect either
his rights or his safety. But we have shewn (Book I. §169) that menderive
the right of punishment solely from their right to provide for their own
safety; and consequently they cannot claim it except against those by
whom they have been injured. Could it escape Grotius, that, notwith-
standing all the precautions added by him in the following paragraphs,
his opinion opens a door to all the ravages of enthusiasmandfanaticism,
and furnishes ambition with numberless pretexts?Mahometandhissuc-
cessors have desolated and subdued Asia, to avenge the indignity done
to the unity of the Godhead; all whom they termed associators or idol-
aters fell victims to their devout fury. <138>
* De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap. xx. §11.
§7. But not
by force.


266
book ii: nations in relation to other states
Since nations ought to perform these duties or ofﬁces of humanity
towards each other, according as one stands in need, and the other can
reasonably comply with them,—every nation being free, independent,
and sole arbitress of her own actions, it belongs to each to consider
whether her situation warrants her in asking or granting any thing on
this head. Thus 1. Every nation has a perfect right to ask of another that
assistance and those kind ofﬁces which she conceives herself to stand in
need of. To prevent her, would be doing her an injury. If she makes the
application without necessity, she is guilty of a breach of duty; but in
this respect, she is wholly independent of the judgment of others. A
nation has a right to ask for these kind ofﬁces, but not to demand them.
For, 2. Theseofﬁces beingdueonlyinnecessity,andbyanationwhich
can comply with them without being wanting to itself; the nation that
is applied to has, on the other hand, a right of judging whether the case
really demands them, and whether circumstances will allow her to grant
them consistently with that regard which she ought to pay to her own
safety and interests: for instance, a nation is in want of corn, and applies
to another nation to sell her a quantity of it:—in this case it rests with
the latter party to judge whether, by a compliance with the request, they
will not expose themselves to the danger of a scarcity: and if they refuse
to comply, their determination is to be patiently acquiesced in. We have
very lately seen a prudent performance of this duty on the part of
Russia: she generously assisted Sweden when threatened with a famine,7
but refused to other powers the liberty of purchasing corn in Livonia,
from the circumstance of standing herself in need of it, and, no doubt,
from weighty political motives likewise.
Thus the right which a nation has to the ofﬁces of humanity is but
an imperfect one: she cannot compel another nation to the performance
of them. The nation that unreasonably refuses them, offends against
equity, which consists in acting conformably to the imperfect right of
another: but thereby no injuryisdone; injuryorinjusticebeingatrespass
against the perfect right of another.
7. 1740–63.
§8. The right
to require the
ofﬁces of
humanity.
§9. The right
of judging
whether they
are to be
granted.
§10. A nation
is not to com-
pel another
to perform
those ofﬁces
of which the
refusal is no
wrong.


chapter i
267
It is impossible that nations should mutually discharge all these sev-
eral duties if they do not love each other. This is the pure source from
which the ofﬁces of humanity should proceed; they will retain the char-
acter and perfection of it. Then nations will be seen sincerely and cheer-
fully to help each other, earnestly to promote their common welfare,and
cultivate peace without jealousy or distrust.
A real friendship will be seen to reign among them; and this happy
state consists in a mutual affection. Every nation is obliged to cultivate
the friendship of other nations, and carefully to avoid whatever might
kindle their enmity against her. Wise and prudent nations often pursue
this line of conduct from views of direct and present interest: a more
noble, more general, and <139> less direct interest, is too rarely the mo-
tive of politicians. If it be incontestable that men must love each other
in order to answer the views of nature and discharge the duties which
she prescribes them, as well as for their own private advantage,—can it
be doubted that nations are under the like reciprocal obligation? Is it in
the power of men, on dividing themselves into differentpoliticalbodies,
to break the ties of that universal society which nature has established
amongst them?
If a man ought to qualify himself for becoming useful to other
men,—and a citizen, for rendering useful services to his country and
fellow citizens,—a nation likewise, in perfecting herself, ought to have
in view the acquisition of a greater degree of ability to promote the per-
fection and happiness of other nations: she should be careful to set them
good examples, and avoid setting them a pattern of any thing evil. Im-
itation is natural to mankind: thevirtues of acelebratednationaresome-
times imitated, and much more frequently its vices and defects.
Glory being a possession of great importance to a nation, as we have
shewn in a particular chapter expressly devoted to the subject,*—the
duty of a nation extends even to the care of the glory of other nations.
In the ﬁrst place, she should, on occasion, contribute to enable them to
merit true glory: secondly, she should do them in this respect all the
justice due to them, and use all proper endeavours that such justice be
* Book i. chap. xv.
§11. Mutual
love of nations.
§12. Each
nation ought
to cultivate the
friendship of
others.
§13. To per-
fect itself with
a view to the
advantage of
others, and set
them good
examples.
§14. To take
care of their
glory.


268
book ii: nations in relation to other states
universally done them: ﬁnally, instead of irritating, she should kindly
extenuate the bad effect which some slight blemishes may produce.
From the manner in which we have established the obligation of per-
forming the ofﬁces of humanity, it plainly appears to be solely founded
on the nature of man. Wherefore no nation can refuse them to another,
under pretence of its professing a different religion: to be entitled to
them, it is sufﬁcient that the claimant is our fellow-creature. Aconform-
ity of belief and worship may become a new tie of friendship between
nations; but no difference in these respects can warrant us in laying aside
the character of men, or the sentiments annexed to it. As wehavealready
related (§5) some instances wellworthyof imitation,letusheredojustice
to the pontiff who at present ﬁlls the see of Rome, and hasrecentlygiven
a very remarkable example, and which cannot be too highly com-
mended. Information being given to that prince, that several Dutch
ships remained at Civita Vecchia, not daring to put to sea for fear of the
Algerine corsairs, he immediately issued orders that the frigates of the
ecclesiastical state should convoy those ships out of danger; and hisnun-
cio at Brussels received instructions to signify to the ministers of the
states-general, that his holiness made it a rule to protect commerce and
perform the duties of humanity, without regarding any difference of
religion. Such exalted sentiments cannot fail of raising a veneration for
Benedict XIV.8 even amongst protestants. <140>
Howhappy wouldmankindbe,weretheseamiablepreceptsof nature
every where observed! Nations would communicate to each other their
products and their knowledge; a profound peace would prevail all over
the earth, and enrich it with its invaluable fruits; industry, the sciences,
and the arts, would be employed in promoting our happiness, no less
than in relieving our wants; violent methods of deciding contestswould
be no more heard of: all differences would be terminated bymoderation,
justice, and equity; the world would have the appearance of a large re-
public; men would live every-where like brothers, and each individual
be a citizen of the universe. That this idea should be but a delightful
8. Pope Benedict XIV, r. 1740–58.
§15. Differ-
ence of reli-
gion ought not
to preclude
the ofﬁces of
humanity.
§16. Rule and
measure the
ofﬁces of
humanity.


chapter i
269
dream! yet it ﬂows from the nature and essence of man.* But disorderly
passions, and private and mistaken interest, will forever preventitsbeing
realised. Let us then consider what limitations the present state of men,
and the ordinary maxims and conduct of nations, may render necessary
in the practice of these precepts of nature, which are in themselves so
noble and excellent.
The law of nature cannot condemn the good to become the dupes
and prey of the wicked, and the victims of their injustice and ingrati-
tude. Melancholy experience shews that most nations aim only to
strengthen and enrich themselves at the expense of others,—to domi-
neer over them, and even, if an opportunity offers, to oppress and bring
them under the yoke. Prudence does not allow us to strengthen an en-
emy, or one in whom we discover a desire of plundering and oppressing
us; and the care of our own safety forbids it. We have seen (§3, &c.) that
a nation does not owe her assistance and the ofﬁces of humanitytoother
nations, except so far as the grant of them is reconcilable with her duties
to herself. Hence it evidently follows, that, though the universal love of
mankind obliges us to grant at all times, and to all, even to our enemies,
* Here again let us call in the authority of Cicero to our support. “All mankind
(says that excellent philosopher) should lay it down as their constant rule of action,
that individual and general advantage should be the same; for if each man strives to
grasp every advantage for himself, all the ties of human society will be broken. And
if nature ordains that man should feel interested in the welfare of his fellow man,
whoever he be, and for the single reason that he is a man,—it necessarily follows,
that, according to the intentions of nature, all mankind must have one common
interest.—Ergo unum debet esse omnibus propositum, ut eadem sit utilitas unius-
cujusque et universorum: quam si ad se quisque rapiat, dissolvetur omnis humana
consociatio. Atque si etiam hoc natura praescribit, ut homo homini, quicunque sit,
ob eam ipsam causam, quod is homo sit, consultum velit, necesse est, secundum
eandem naturam, omnium utilitatem esse communem. [[“This, then, ought to be
the chief end of all men, to make the interest of each individual and of the whole
body political identical. For, if the individual appropriatesto selﬁshendswhatshould
be devoted to the common good, all human fellowshipwillbedestroyed.Andfurther,
if Nature ordains that one man shall desire to promote the interest of a fellow man,
whoever he may be, just because he is a fellow man, then it follows, in accordance
with that same Nature, that there are interests which all men have in common.”]]De
Ofﬁc. lib. iii. cap. vi.

270
book ii: nations in relation to other states
those ofﬁces which can only tend to render them more moderate and
virtuous, because no inconvenience is to be apprehended from granting
them,—we are not obliged to give them such succours as probably may
become destructive to ourselves. Thus, 1. the exceeding importance of
trade not only to the wants and conveniences of life, but likewise to the
strength of a state, and furnishing it with the means of defending itself
against its enemies,—and the insatiable <141> avidity of those nations
which seek wholly and exclusively to engross it,—thus, I say, these cir-
cumstances authorise a nation possessed of a branch of trade, or the
secret of some important manufacture or fabric, to reserve to herself
those sources of wealth, and, instead of communicating them toforeign
nations, to take measures against it. But where the necessaries or con-
veniences of life are in question, the nation ought to sell them to others
at a reasonable price, and not convert her monopoly into a system of
odious extortion. To commerce England chieﬂy owes her greatness, her
power, and her safety: who then will presume to blame her for endeav-
ouring, by every fair and just method, to retain the several branches of
it in her own hand?
2. As to things directly and more particularly useful for war, a nation
is under no obligation to sell them to others, of whom it has the smallest
suspicion; and prudence even declares against it. Thus, by the Roman
laws, people were very justly prohibited toinstructthebarbarousnations
in building gallies. Thus, in England laws have been enacted, to prevent
the best method of ship-building from being carried out of the
kingdom.
This caution is to be carried farther, with respect to nations more
justly suspected. Thus, when the Turks were successfully pursuing their
victorious career, and rapidly advancing to the zenith of power, all chris-
tian nations ought, independentof everybigottedconsideration,tohave
considered them as enemies; even the most distant of those nations,
though not engaged in any contest with them, would have been justi-
ﬁable in breaking off all commerce with a people who made it their
profession to subdue by force of arms all who would not acknowledge
the authority of their prophet.
chapter i
271
Let us farther observe, with regard to the prince in particular, that he
ought not, in affairs of this nature, to obey without reserve all the sug-
gestions of a noble and generous heart impelling him to sacriﬁce his own
interests to the advantage of others or to motives of generosity; because
it is not his private interest that is in question, but that of the state,—that
of the nation who has committed herself to his care. Cicero says that a
great and elevated soul despises pleasures, wealth, life itself, and makes no
account of them, when the common utility lies at stake.* He is right, and
such sentiments are to be admired in a private person; but generosity is
not to be exerted at the expense of others. The head or conductor of a
nation ought not to practise that virtue in public affairs without great
circumspection, nor to a greater extent than will redound to the gloryand
real advantage of the state. As to the common good of human society, he
ought to pay the same attention to it, as the nation he represents would
be obliged to pay, were the government of her affairs in her own hand.
But though the duties of a nation towards herself set bounds to the
obligation of performing the ofﬁces of humanity, they <142> cannot in
the least affect the prohibition of doing any harm to others, of causing
them any prejudice,—in a word, of injuring them.† . . . If every man
is, by his very nature, obliged to assist in promoting the perfection of
others, much more cogent are the reasons which forbid him to increase
their imperfection and that of their condition. The same duties are in-
cumbent on nations (Prelim. §§5, 6). No nation therefore ought to com-
mit any actions tending to impair the perfection of other nations, and
that of their condition, or to impede their progress,—in other words,
to injure them. And since the perfection of a nation consists in her ap-
* De Ofﬁc. lib. iii. cap. v.
† Le´zer (professedly borrowedfromtheLatinlaedo)isthetermusedbytheauthor,
who, in order the better to explain his meaning, proceeds to inform us, that “nuire
(to hurt), offenser (to offend), faire tort (to wrong), porter dommage (to cause detri-
ment), porter prejudice (to prejudice), blesser (to wound or hurt), are not of precisely
the same import,”andthatbythewordle´zer (whichishererenderedinjure)hemeans,
“in general, causing imperfection inthe injuredparty,orinhiscondition,—rendering
his person or his condition less perfect.” [[Note added in 1797 edition.]]
§17. Particular
limitation with
regard to the
prince.
§18. No
nation ought
to injure
others.


272
book ii: nations in relation to other states
titude to attain the end of civil society,—and the perfection of her con-
dition, in not wanting any of the things necessary to that end (Book I.
§14)—no one nation ought to hinder another from attaining the end of
civil society, or to render her incapable of attaining it. This generalprin-
ciple forbids nations to practise any evil manoeuvres tending to create
disturbance in another state, to foment discord, to corrupt its citizens,
to alienate its allies, to raise enemies against it, to tarnish its glory, and
to deprive it of its natural advantages.
However, it will be easily conceived that negligence in fulﬁlling the
common duties of humanity, and even the refusal of these duties or
ofﬁces, is not an injury. To neglect or refuse contributing to the perfec-
tion of a nation, is not impairing that perfection.
It must be further observed, thatwhenwe aremakinguseof ourright,
when we are doing what we owe to ourselves or to others, if, from this
action of ours, any prejudice results to the perfection of another,—any
detriment to his exterior condition,—we are not guilty of an injury: we
aredoingwhat is lawful,orevenwhatweoughttodo.Thedamagewhich
accrues to the other, is no part of our intention: it is merely an accident,
the imputability of which must be determined by the particularcircum-
stances. For instance, in case of a lawful defence, the harm we do to the
aggressor is not the object we aim at:—we act only with a view to our
own safety: we make use of our right; and the aggressor alone is charge-
able with the mischief which he brings on himself.
Nothing is more opposite to the duties of humanity, nor more con-
trary to that societywhich should becultivatedbynations,thanoffences,
or actions which give a just displeasure to others: every nation therefore
should carefully avoid giving any other nation real offence: I say, real;
for, should others take offence at our behaviour when we are only using
our rights or fulﬁlling our duties, the fault lies with them, not with us.
Offences ex-<143>cite such asperity and rancour between nations, that
we should avoid giving any room even for ill-grounded picques, when
it can be done without any inconveniency, or failure in our duty. It is
said that certain medals and dull jests irritated Lewis XIV. against the
United Provinces, to such a degree, as to induce him, in 1672, to un-
dertake the destruction of that republic.
§19. Offences.

chapter ii
273
The maxims laid down in this chapter,—those sacred precepts of na-
ture,—were for a long time unknown to nations. The ancients had no
notion of any duty they owed to nations with whom they were not
united by treaties of friendship.* The Jews especially placed a great part
of their zeal in hating all nations; and, as a natural consequence, they
were detested and despised by theminturn. Atlengththevoiceof nature
came to be heard among civilised nations; they perceived that all men
are brethren.† When will the happy time come that they shall behave as
such?
chapter ii
Of the Mutual Commerce between Nations.
All men ought to ﬁnd on earth the things they stand in need of. In the
primitive state of communion, they took them wherever they happened
to meet with them, if another had not before appropriated them to his
own use. The introduction of dominion and property could notdeprive
menof soessential aright,andconsequentlyitcannottakeplacewithout
leaving them, in general, some mean of procuring what is useful or nec-
essary to them. This mean is commerce: by it every man may still supply
his wants. Things being now become property, there is no obtaining
them without the owner’s consent; nor are they usually to be had for
nothing; but they may be bought, or exchanged for other thingsof equal
value. Men are therefore under an obligation to carry on that commerce
with each other, if they wish not to deviate from the views of nature;
and this obligation extends also to whole nations or states (Prelim. §5).
* To the example of the Romans may be added that of the English in former
days,—since,onthe occasionof anavigatorbeingaccusedof havingcommittedsome
depredations on the natives of India, “this act of injustice” (according to Grotius)
“was not without advocates, who maintained, that, by the ancient laws of England,
crimes committed against foreign nations, with whom there existed no public treaty
of alliance, were not punishable in that kingdom.” Hist. of the Disturbances in the
Low Countries, Book xvi. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
† See (§1) a ﬁne passage of Cicero.
§20. Bad
custom of
the ancients.
§21. General
obligation of
nations to
carry on
mutual
commerce.


274
book ii: nations in relation to other states
It is seldom that nature is seen in one place to produce every thing nec-
essary for the use of man: one country abounds in corn, another in pas-
tures and cattle, a third in timber and metals, &c. If all those countries
trade together, as is agreeable to human nature, no one of them will be
without such things as are useful <144> and necessary; and the views of
nature, our common mother, will be fulﬁlled. Further, one country is
ﬁtter for some kind of products than another, as, for instance, ﬁtter for
the vine than for tillage. If trade and barter take place, every nation, on
the certainty of procuring what it wants, will employ its land and its
industry in the most advantageous manner; and mankind in general
prove gainers by it. Such are the foundations of the general obligation
incumbent on nations reciprocally to cultivate commerce.
Every nation ought, therefore, not only to countenance trade, as far
as it reasonably can, but even to protect and favour it. The care of the
public roads,—the safety of travellers,—the establishment of ports, of
places of sale, of well-regulated fairs,—all contribute to this end. And
where these are attended with expense, the nation, as we have already
observed (Book I. §103), may, by tolls and other duties equitably pro-
portioned, indemnify itself for its disbursements.
Freedom being very favourable to commerce, it is implied in the du-
ties of nations, that they should support it as far as possible, instead of
cramping it by unnecessary burdens or restrictions. Whereforethosepri-
vate privileges and tolls, which obtain in many places, and press so
heavily on commerce, are deservedly to be reprobated, unless founded
on very important reasons arising from the public good.
Every nation, in virtue of her natural liberty, has a right to trade with
those who are willing to correspond with such intentions; and to molest
her in the exercise of her right is doing her an injury. The Portuguese,
at the time of their great power in the East Indies, were for excluding
all other European nations from any commerce with the Indians: but
such a pretension, no less iniquitous than chimerical, was treated with
contempt; and the other nations agreed to consider any acts of violence
in support of it, as just grounds for making war against the Portuguese.
This common right of all nations is, at present, generally acknowledged
under the appellation of freedom of trade.
§22. They
should favour
trade.
§23. Freedom
of trade.
§24. Right
of trading,
belonging to
nations.


chapter ii
275
But although it be in general the duty of a nation to carry on com-
merce with others, and though each nation has arighttotradewiththose
countries that are willing to encourage her,—on the other hand,anation
ought to decline a commerce which is disadvantageous or dangerous
(Book 1. §98); and since, in case of collision, her duties to herself are
paramounttoherdutiesto others,shehasafullandclearrighttoregulate
her conduct, in this respect, by the consideration of what her advantage
or safety requires. We have already seen (Book I. §92) that each nation
is, on her own part, the sole judge, whether or not it be convenient for
her to cultivate such or such branch of commerce: she may therefore
either embrace or reject any commercial proposals from foreignnations,
without affording them any just grounds to accuse her of injustice, or
to demand a reason for such refusal, much less to make use of compul-
sion. She is free in the administration <145> of her affairs, withoutbeing
accountable to any other. The obligation of trading with other nations
is in itself an imperfect obligation (Prelim. §17), and gives them only an
imperfect right; so that, in cases where the commerce would be detri-
mental, that obligation is entirely void. When the Spaniards attacked
the Americans under a pretence that those people refused to trafﬁc with
them, they only endeavoured to throw a colourable veil over their own
insatiable avarice.
These few remarks, together with what we have already said on the
subject (Book I. Chap. VIII.) may sufﬁce to establish the principles of
the natural law of nations respecting the mutual commerce of states. It
is not difﬁcult to point out, in general, what are the duties of nations in
this respect, and what the law of nature prescribes to them for the good
of the great society of mankind. But as each nation is only so far obliged
to carry on commercewith others, asshecandoitwithoutbeingwanting
to herself,—and as the whole ultimately depends on the judgment that
each state may form of what it can and ought to do in particularcases,—
nations cannot count on any thing more than generalities, such as the
inherent liberty of each to carry on trade,—and, moreover,onimperfect
rights, which depend on the judgment of others, and, consequently, are
ever uncertain. Wherefore, if they wish to secure to themselves any def-
inite and constant advantages, they must procure them by treaties.
§25. Each
nation is sole
judge of the
propriety of
commerce on
her own part.
§26. Necessity
of commercial
treaties.


276
book ii: nations in relation to other states
Since a nation has a full right to regulate herself in commercialaffairs
by what is useful or advantageous to her, she may make such commercial
treaties as she thinks proper; and no other nation has a right to take
offence, provided those treaties do not affect the perfect rights of others.
If, by the engagements contracted, a nation, unnecessarily, or without
powerful reasons, renders herself incapable of joining in the general
trade which nature recommends between nations, she trespasses against
her duty. But the nation being the sole judge in this case (Prelim. §16),
other nations are bound to respect her natural liberty,—to acquiesce in
her determination, and even to suppose that she is actuated by substan-
tial reasons. Every commercial treaty, therefore, which does not impair
the perfect right of others, is allowable between nations; nor can the
execution of it be lawfully opposed. But those commercial treatiesalone
are in themselves just and commendable, which pay to the general in-
terestof mankindasgreatadegreeof respectasispossibleandreasonable
in the particular case.
As express promises and engagements should be inviolable,everywise
and virtuous nation will be attentive to examine and weighacommercial
treaty before she concludes it, and to take care that she be not thereby
engaged to any thing contrary to the duties which she owes to herself
and others.
Nations may in their treaties insertsuchclausesandconditionsasthey
think proper: they are at liberty to make them perpetual, or temporary,
or dependent on certain events. It is usually most <146> prudent not to
engage forever, as circumstances may afterwards intervene, by which the
treaty might become very oppressive to one of the contracting parties.
A nation may conﬁne a treaty to the grant of only a precarious right,—
reserving to herself the liberty of revoking it at pleasure.Wehavealready
observed (Book I. §94), that a simple permission does not, any more
than long custom (ibid. §95), give any perfect right to a trade. These
things are therefore not to be confounded with treaties,—not even with
those which give only a precarious right.
When once a nation has entered into engagements by treaty, she is
no longer at liberty to do, in favour of others, contrary to the tenor of
§27. General
rule concern-
ing those
treaties.
§28. Duty of
nations in
making those
treaties.
§29. Perpetual
or temporary
treaties, or
treaties revo-
cable at
pleasure.
§30. Nothing
contrary to


chapter ii
277
the treaty, what she might otherwise have granted to them agreeably
to the duties of humanity or the general obligation of mutual com-
merce: for she is to do for others no more than what is in her power;
and having deprived herself of the liberty of disposing of a thing, that
thing is no longer in her power. Therefore when a nation has engaged
to another that she will sell certain merchandise or produce to the latter
only,—as, for instance, corn,—she can no longer sell it to any other.
The case is the same in a contract to purchase certain goods of that
nation alone.
But it will be asked, how and on what occasions a nation may enter
into engagements which deprive her of the liberty to fulﬁl her duties to
others. As the duties we owe to ourselves are paramount to those we owe
to others,—if a nation ﬁnds her safety and substantial advantage in a
treaty of this nature, sheisunquestionablyjustiﬁableincontractingit,—
especially as she does not thereby interrupt the general commerce of
nations, but simply causes one particular branch of her own commerce
to pass through other hands, or ensures to a particular people certain
things of which they stand in need. If a state which stands in need of
salt can secure a supply of it from another, by engaging to sell her corn
and cattle only to that other nation, who will doubt but she has a right
to conclude so salutary a treaty? In this case, her corn or cattle are goods
which she disposes of for supplying her own wants. But, from what we
have observed (§28), engagements of this kind are not to be enteredinto,
without very good reasons. However, be the reasons good or bad, the
treaty is still valid, and other nations have no right to oppose it (§27).
Every one is at liberty to renounce his right: a nation therefore may
lay a restriction on her commerce in favour of another nation, and en-
gage not to trafﬁc in a certain kind of goods, or to forbear trading with
such and such a country, &c. And in departing from such engagements,
she acts against the perfect right of the nation with which she has con-
tracted; and the latter has a right to restrain her. The natural liberty of
trade is not hurt by treaties of this nature: for that liberty consists only
in every nation being unmolested in her righttocarry oncommercewith
those that consent to trafﬁc with her; each one remaining free <147> to
§31. How far
lawful to give
up by treaty
the liberty of
trading with
other nations.
§32. A nation
may abridge its
commerce in
favour of
another.
the tenor of a
treaty can be
granted to a
third party.


278
book ii: nations in relation to other states
embrace or decline a particular branch of commerce, as she shall judge
most advantageous to the state.
Nations not only carry on trade for the sake of procuring necessary
or useful articles, but also with a view to make it a source of opulence.
Now, wherever a proﬁt is to be made, it is equally lawful for every one
to participate in it: but the most diligent may lawfully anticipate the
others by taking possession of an advantage which lies open to the ﬁrst
occupier;—he may even secure the whole entirely to himself, if he has
any lawful means of appropriating it. When thereforeaparticularnation
is in sole possession of certain articles, another nation may lawfully pro-
cure to herself by treaty the advantage of being the only buyer, and then
sell them again all over the world. And as it is indifferent to nationsfrom
what hand they receivethecommoditiestheywant,providedtheyobtain
them at a reasonable price, the monopoly of this nation does not clash
with the general duties of humanity, provided that she do not take ad-
vantage of it to set an unreasonable and exorbitant price on her goods.
Should she, by an abuse of her monopoly, exact an immoderate proﬁt,
this would be an offence against the law of nature, as by such anexaction
she either deprives other nations of a necessary or agreeablearticlewhich
nature designed for all men, or obliges them to purchase it at too dear a
rate: nevertheless she does not do them any positive wrong, because,
strictly speaking, and according to external right, the owner of a com-
modity may either keep it, or set what price he pleases on it. Thus the
Dutch, by a treaty with the king of Ceylon,9 have wholly engrossed the
cinnamon trade: yet, whilst they keep their proﬁts within just limits,
other nations have no right to complain.
But, were the necessaries of life in question,—were the monopolist
inclined to raise them to an excessive price,—other nations would be
authorised by the care of their own safety, and for the advantage of hu-
man society, to form a general combination in order to reduce a greedy
oppressor to reasonable terms. The right to necessaries is very different
9. By the Kandyan Treaty of 1638, the Dutch allied themselves with the king of
Kandy (Ceylon) against the Portuguese. In return for military assistance, the Dutch
East India Company gained numerous commercial privileges.
§33. A nation
may appro-
priate to itself
a particular
branch of
trade.


chapter ii
279
from that to things adapted only to convenience and pleasure, which we
may dispense with, if they be too dear. It would be absurd that the sub-
sistence and being of other nations should depend on the caprice or
avidity of one.
Among the modern institutions for the advantage of commerce, one
of the most useful is that of consuls, or persons residing in the large
trading cities, and especially the seaports, of foreign countries, with a
commission to watch over the rights and privileges of their nation, and
to decide disputes between her merchants there. When a nation trades
largely with a country, it is requisite to have there a person charged with
such a commission: and as the state which allows of this commercemust
naturally favour it,—for the same reason also, it must admit the consul.
But there being no absolute and perfect obligation to this, the nation
<148> that wishes to have a consul, must procure this right by the com-
mercial treaty itself.
The consul being charged with the affairs of his sovereign, and re-
ceiving his orders, continues his subject, and accountable to him for his
actions.
The consul is no public minister (as will appear by what we shall say
of the character of ministers, in our fourth book), and cannot pretend
to the privileges annexed to such character. Yet, bearing his sovereign’s
commission, and being in this quality received by the prince in whose
dominions he resides, he is, in a certain degree, entitled to theprotection
of the law of nations. This sovereign, by the very act of receiving him,
tacitly engages to allow him all the liberty and safety necessary to the
proper discharge of his functions, without which the admission of the
consul would be nugatory and delusive.
The functions of a consul require, in the ﬁrst place, that he be not a
subject of the state where he resides; as, in this case, he would be obliged
in all things to conform to its orders, and thus not be at liberty to acquit
himself of the duties of his ofﬁce.
They seem even to require that the consul should be independent of
the ordinary criminal justice of the place where he resides, so as not to
be molested or imprisoned, unless he himself violate the law of nations
by some enormous crime.
§34. Consuls.


280
book ii: nations in relation to other states
And though the importance of the consular functions be not so great
as to procure to the consul’s person the inviolability and absolute in-
dependence enjoyed by public ministers,—yet, being under the partic-
ular protection of the sovereign who employs him, and intrusted with
the care of his concerns,—if he commits any crime, the respect due to
his master requires that he should be sent home to be punished. Such is
the mode pursued by states that are inclined to preserve a good under-
standing with each other. But the surest way is, expresslytosettleallthese
matters, as far as is practicable, by the commercial treaty.
Wicquefort, in his treatise of The Ambassador, Book I. §5, says that
consuls do not enjoy the protection of the law of nations, and that, both in
civil and criminal cases, they are subject to the justice of the place where they
reside. But the very instances he quotes contradict his proposition. The
states-general of the United Provinces, whose consul had beenaffronted
and put under arrest by the governor of Cadiz, complained of it to the
court of Madrid as a breach of the law of nations. And in the year 1634
the republic of Venice was near coming to a rupture with pope Urban VIII.
on account of the violence offered to the Venetian consul by the governor of
Ancona. The governor, suspecting this consul to have given information
detrimental to the commerce of Ancona, had persecuted him, seized his
furniture and papers, and caused him to be summoned, declared guilty
of contumacy, and banished, under pretence that, contrary to public pro-
hibition, he had caused goods to be unloaded in a time of contagion. This
consul’s suc-<149>cessor he likewise imprisoned. The Venetian senate
warmly insisted on having due satisfaction: and, on the interposition of
the ministers of France, who were apprehensive of an open rupture, the
pope obliged the governor of Ancona to give the republic satisfaction
accordingly.
In default of treaties, custom is to be the rule on these occasions; for
a prince who receives a consul without express conditions, is supposed
to receive him on the footing established by custom.


chapter iii
281
chapter iii
Of the Dignity and Equality of Nations,—
of Titles,—and other Marks of Honour.
Every nation, every sovereign and independent state, deserves consid-
eration and respect, because it makes an immediate ﬁgure in the grand
society of the human race, is independent of all earthly power, and is
an assemblage of a great number of men, which is, doubtless, morecon-
siderable than any individual. Thesovereignrepresentshiswholenation;
he unites in his person all its majesty. No individual, though ever so free
and independent, can be placed in competition with a sovereign; this
would be putting a single person upon an equality with an united mul-
titude of his equals. Nations and sovereigns are therefore under an ob-
ligation, and at the same time have a right, to maintain their dignity,
and to cause it to be respected, as being of the utmost importance to
their safety and tranquillity.
We have already observed (Prelim. §18) that nature has established a
perfect equality of rights between independent nations. Consequently
none can naturally lay claim to any superior prerogative: for, whatever
privileges any one of them derives from freedom and sovereignty, the
others equally derive the same from the same source.
And since precedency or pre-eminence of rank is a prerogative, no
nation, no sovereign, can naturally claim it as a right. Why should na-
tions, that are not dependent on him, give up any point to him against
their will? However, as a powerful and extensive state is much more con-
siderable in universal society, than a small state, it is reasonable that the
latter should yield totheformer,onoccasionswhereonemustnecessarily
yield to the other, as in an assembly,—and should pay it those mere cer-
emonial deferences, which do not in fact destroy their equality, and only
shew a priority of order, a ﬁrst place among equals. Other nations will
naturally assign the ﬁrst place to the more powerful state; and it would
be equally useless as ridiculous for the weaker one obstinately tocontend
about it. Theantiquityof thestateentersalsointoconsiderationonthese
§35. Dignity
of nations or
sovereign
states.
§36. Their
equality.
§37. Prece-
dency,

282
book ii: nations in relation to other states
occasions: a new-comer cannot dispossess <150> any one of thehonours
he has enjoyed; and he must produce very strong reasons, before he can
obtain a preference.
The form of government is naturally foreign to this question. The
dignity, the majesty, resides originally in the body of the state; that of
the sovereign is derived from his representing the nation. And can it be
imagined that a state possesses more or less dignity according as it is
governed by a single person, or by many? At present kings claim a su-
periority of rank over republics: but this pretension has noothersupport
than the superiority of their strength. Formerly, the Roman republic
considered all kings as very far beneath them: but the monarchs of Eu-
rope, ﬁnding none but feeble republics to oppose them, have disdained
to admit them to an equality. The republic of Venice, and that of the
United Provinces, have obtained the honours of crowned heads; but
their ambassadors yield precedency to those of kings.
In consequence of what we have just established, if the form of gov-
ernment in a nation happens to be changed, she will still preserve the
same honours and rank of which she was before in possession. When
England had abolished royalty,10 Cromwell would suffer no abatement
of the honours that had been paid to the crown, or to the nation; and
he every-where maintained theEnglishambassadorsintheranktheyhad
always possessed.
If the grades of precedency have been settled by treaties, or by long
custom founded on tacit consent, it is necessary to conform to the es-
tablished rule. To dispute with a prince the rank he has acquired in this
manner, is doing him an injury, inasmuch as it is an expression of con-
tempt for him, or a violation of engagements that secure to him a right.
Thus, by the injudicious partition between the sons of Charlemagne,11
the elder having obtained the empire, the younger, who received the
10. Charles I of England was beheaded on January 30, 1649, after which the state
was governed by the Rump Parliament and Oliver Cromwell’s Protectorate (1653–
58).
11. Divisio Regnorum, 806.
§38. The form
of government
is foreign to
this question.
§39. A state
ought to keep
its rank,
notwith-
standing any
changes in the
form of its
government.
§40. In this
respect, trea-
ties and estab-
lished customs
ought to be
observed.


chapter iii
283
kingdom of France, yielded precedency to him the more readily, asthere
still remained at that time a recent idea of the majesty of the real Roman
empire. His successors followed the rule they found established:—they
were imitated by the other kings of Europe; and thus the imperialcrown
continues to possess, without opposition, the ﬁrst rank in Christendom.
With most of the other crowns, the point of precedency remains yet
undetermined.
Some people would have us to look upon the precedency of the em-
peror as something more than the ﬁrst place among equals: they would
fain attribute to him a superiority over all kings, and in a word make
him the temporal head of Christendom.* And it in fact appears, that
many emperors entertained ideasof such pretensions,—asif,byreviving
the name of the Roman empire, they could also revive its rights. Other
states have been on their guard against these pretensions. We may see in
Mezeray† the precautions taken by king Charles V.12 when the emperor
<151> Charles IV. visited France,13 “for fear,” says the historian,“lestthat
prince, and his son the king of the Romans, should found any right of
superiority on his courtesy.” Bodinus relates,‡ that “the French took
great offence at the emperor Sigismund’s placing himself in the royal
seat in full parliament, and at his having knighted the senechal de
Beaucaire,”14—adding, that, “torepairtheegregiouserrortheyhadcom-
mitted in suffering it, they would not allow the same emperor, when at
Lyons, to make the count of Savoy a duke.” At present a king of France
would doubtless think it a degradation of his dignity,werehetointimate
* Bartolus went so far as to say, that “all those were heretics, who did not believe
that the emperor was lord of the whole earth.” See Bodinus’s Republic,Booki.Chap.
ix. p. m. 139.
† History of France, explanation of the medals of Charles V.
‡ In his Republic, p. 138.
12. Charles V, king of France, r. 1366–80.
13. Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor (r. 1355–78), visited his nephew Charles V
of France in 1378. He died in November of that same year.
14. Sigismund, son of Charles IV, was Holy Roman Emperor from 1410 to 1437.


284
book ii: nations in relation to other states
the most distant idea that another might claim any authority in his
kingdom.*
As a nation may confer on her conductor what degree of authority,
and what rights she thinks proper, she is equally free in regard to the
name, the titles, and honours, with which she may choose to decorate
him. Butdiscretionandthecareof herreputationrequirethatsheshould
not, in this respect, deviate too far from the customs commonly estab-
lished among civilised nations. Let us further observe, that, in thispoint,
she ought to be guided by prudence, and inclined toproportionthetitles
and honours of her chief to the power he possesses, and to the degree
of authority with which she chooses to invest him. Titles and honours,
it is true, determine nothing: they are but empty names, and vain cere-
monies, when they are mis-placed: yet who does not knowhowpowerful
an inﬂuence they have on the minds of mankind? This is then a more
serious affair than it appears at the ﬁrst glance. The nation ought to take
care not to debase herself before other states, and not to degrade her
chief by too humble a title: she ought to be still more careful not to swell
his heart by a vain name, by unbounded honours, so as to inspire him
with the idea of arrogating to himself a commensurate authority over
her, or of acquiring a proportionate power by unjust conquests. On the
other hand, an exalted title may engage the chief to support with greater
ﬁrmness the dignity of the nation. Prudence is guided by circumstances,
and, on every occasion, keeps within due bounds. “Royalty,” says a re-
spectable author,15 who may be believed on this subject, “rescued the
house of Brandenburg from that yoke of servitude under which the
* Pentherrieder, minister plenipotentiary of the emperor at the congress of Cam-
bray [[1722]], made an attempt to insure to his master an incontestable superiority
and pre-eminence over all the other crowned heads. He induced count Provana, the
king of Sardinia’s minister, to sign a deed, in which he declared that neither his own
sovereign nor any other prince had a right to dispute pre-eminence with theemperor.
Its contents being made public, the kings made such heavy complaints on the oc-
casion, that Provana was recalled, and the emperor ordered his minister to suppress
the deed,—affecting at the same time a profound ignorance of the whole transac-
tion:—and thus the affair was dropped. Memoirs of Mons. de St. Philippe [[San
Felipe]]. Vol. iv. p. 194. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
15. Frederick II of Prussia, in his Memoirs of the House of Brandenburg, 1748.
§41. Of the
name and
honours given
by the na-
tion to its
conductor.

chapter iii
285
house of Austria then kept all the German princes. This was a baitwhich
Frederic I. threw out to all his posterity, saying to them as it were, I have
acquired a title for you: do you render <152> yourselves worthy of it: I
have laid the foundations of your greatness; it is you who are to ﬁnish
the work.”*
If the conductor of the state is sovereign, hehasinhishandstherights
and authority of the political society; and consequently he may himself
determine what title he will assume, and what honours shall be paid to
him, unless these have been already determined by the fundamental
laws, or that the limits which have been set to his power manifestly op-
pose such as he wishes to assume. His subjects are equally obliged to
obey him in this, as in whatever he commands by virtue of a lawful
authority. Thus the czar Peter I. grounding his pretensions on the vast
extent of his dominions, took upon himself the title of emperor.
But foreign nations are not obliged to give way to the will of a sov-
ereign who assumes a new title, or of a people who call their chief by
what name they please.†
However, if this title has nothing unreasonable, or contrary to re-
ceived customs, it is altogetheragreeabletothemutualdutieswhichbind
nations together, to give to a sovereign or conductor of a state the same
title that is given him by his people. But if this titleis contrarytocustom,
if it implies attributes which do not belong to him who affects it,foreign
nations may refuse it without his having reason to complain. The title
of “Majesty” is consecrated by custom tomonarchswhocommandgreat
* Memoirs of the House of Brandenburg.
† Cromwell, in writing to Louis the Fourteenth, used the following style—“Oli-
varius, Dominus Protector Angliae, Scotiae,etHiberniae,Ludovico XIV.Francorum
Regi Christianissime Rex.” [[“Oliver, Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ire-
land, to Louis XIV, ruler of the French and Most Christian King.”]]—And the sub-
scription was,—“In Aula nostra Alba. Vester bonus amicus.”[[“InourEnglishCourt.
Your good friend.”]] The court of France was highly offended at this form of ad-
dress.—The ambassador Boreel, in a letter to the Pensionary De Witt, dated May 25,
1655, said that Cromwell’s letter had not been presented, and that those who were
chargedwiththedeliveryof it,hadwith-heldit,throughanapprehensionof itsgiving
rise to some misunderstanding between the two countries. [[Note addedin1773/1797
editions.]]
§42. Whether
a sovereign
may assume
what title and
honours he
pleases.
§43. Right of
other nations
in this respect.
§44. Their
duty.


286
book ii: nations in relation to other states
nations. The emperors of Germany have long affected to reserve it to
themselves, as belonging solely to the imperial crown. But the kings as-
serted with reason, that there was nothing on earth more eminent or
more august than their dignity: they thereforerefusedthetitleof majesty
to him who refused it to them;* and at present, except in a few instances
founded on particular reasons, the title of majesty is a peculiar attribute
of the royal character.
As it would be ridiculous for a petty prince to take the title of king,
and assume the styleof “Majesty,”foreignnations,byrefusingtocomply
with this whim, do nothing but what is conformable to reason and their
duty. However, if there reignsanywhereasovereign,who,notwithstand-
ing the small extent of his power, is accustomed to receive from his
neighbours the title <153> of king, distant nations who would carry on
an intercourse with him, cannot refuse him that title. It belongs not to
them to reform the customs of distant countries.
The sovereign who wishes constantly to receive certain titlesandhon-
ours from other powers, must secure them by treaties. Those who have
entered into engagements in this way are obliged to conform to them,
and cannot deviate from the treaties without doing him an injury. Thus,
in the examples we have produced (§§41 and 42), the czar and the king
of Prussia took care to negotiate before-hand with the courts in friend-
ship with them, to secure their being acknowledged under the new titles
they intended to assume.
The popes have formerly pretended that it belonged to the tiara alone
to create new crowns; they had the conﬁdence to expect that the super-
stition of princes and nations would allow them so sublime a preroga-
tive. But it was eclipsed at the revival of letters.† The emperors of Ger-
* At the famous treaty of Westphalia, the plenipotentiaries of France agreed with
those of the emperor, “that the king and queen writing with their own hand to the
emperor, and giving him the title of majesty, he should answer them, with his own
hand, and give them the same title.” Letter of the plenipotentiaries to M. de Brienne,
Oct. 15, 1646.
† Catholic princes receive still from the pope titles that relate to religion. Bene-
dict XIV. gave that of “Most Faithful” to the king of Portugal;andthecondescension
of other princes connived at the imperative style in which the bull is couched.—It
is dated December 23, 1748.
§45. How
titles and
honours may
be secured.


chapter iii
287
many, who formed the same pretensions, were at least countenanced by
the example of the ancient Roman emperors. They only want the same
power in order to have the same right.
In default of treaties, we ought, with respect to titles, and, in general,
every other mark of honour, to conform to the rule established by gen-
eral custom. To attempt a deviation from it with respect to a nation or
sovereign, when there is no particular reason for such innovation, is ex-
pressing either contempt or ill-will towards them;—a conduct equally
inconsistent with sound policy and with the duties that nations owe to
each other.
The greatest monarch ought to respect in every sovereigntheeminent
character with which he is invested. The independence, the equality of
nations,—the reciprocal duties of humanity,—all these circumstances
should induce him to pay even to the chief of a petty state the respect
due to the station which he ﬁlls. The weakest state is composed of men
as well as the most powerful; and our duties are the same towards all
those who do not depend on us.
But this precept of the law of nature does not extend beyond what
is essential to the respect which independent nations owe to each other,
or that conduct, in a word, which shews that we acknowledge a state or
its chief to be truly independent and sovereign, and consequently en-
titled to every thing due to the quality of sovereignty. But, on the other
hand, a great monarch being, as we have already observed, a very im-
portant personage in human society, it is natural, that, in matters merely
ceremonial, and not derogatory to the equality of rights between na-
tions, he should receive honours to which a petty prince can <154> have
no pretensions: and the latter cannot refuse to pay the formereverymark
of respect which is not inconsistent with his own independence and
sovereignty.
Every nation, every sovereign, ought to maintain their dignity (§35)
by causing due respect to be paid to them; and especially they ought not
to suffer that dignity to be impaired. If then there are titles and honours
which by constant custom belong to a prince, he may insist upon them;
and he ought to do it on occasions where his glory is concerned.
But itisproper todistinguishbetweenneglectortheomissionof what
§46. We must
conform to
general
custom.
§47. Mutual
respect, which
sovereigns owe
to each other.
§48. How
a sovereign
ought to
maintain
his dignity.


288
chapter xvii
How a Nation may separate herself from the State of
which she is a Member, and renounce her Allegiance
to her Sovereign when she is not protected.
200. Difference between the present case and those in
the preceding chapter,
96
201. Duty of the members of a state, or subjects of a
prince, who are in danger,
97
202. Their right when they are abandoned,
97
chapter xviii
Establishment of a Nation in a Country.
203. Possession of a country by a nation,
98
204. Her right over the part in her possession,
98
205. Acquisition of the sovereignty in a vacant country,
99
206. Another manner of acquiring the empire in a
free country,
99
207. How a nation acquires the property of a
desert country,
99
208. A question on this subject,
99
209. Whether it be lawful to take possession of
part of a country inhabited only by a few
wandering tribes,
100
210. Colonies, <xxix>
101
chapter xix
Of our Native Country, and various Matters
relating to it.
211. What is our country,
101
212. Citizens and natives,
101


original contents
31
Sect. 213. Inhabitants,
page 102
214. Naturalisation,
102
215. Citizens’ children born in a foreign country,
102
216. Children born at sea,
102
217. Children born in the armies of the state, or in the
house of its minister at a foreign court,
103
218. Settlement,
103
219. Vagrants,
103
220. Whether a person may quit his country,
103
221. How a person may absent himself for a time,
105
222. Variation of the political laws in that respect:—
they must be obeyed,
105
223. Cases in which a citizen has a right to quit
his country,
105
224. Emigrants,
106
225. Sources of their right,
106
226. If the sovereign infringes their right, he
injures them,
107
227. Supplicants,
107
228. Exile and banishment,
107
229. The exile and the banished man have a right to
live somewhere,
108
230. Nature of that right,
108
231. Duty of nations towards them,
108
232. A nation cannot punish them for faults committed
out of her territories,
109
233. except such as affect the common safety
of mankind,
109
chapter xx
Public, Common, and Private Property.
234. What the Romans called res communes,
109
235. Aggregate wealth of a nation, and its divisions,
109
236. Two modes of acquiring public property,
110
237. The income of the public property is naturally at
the sovereign’s disposal,
110
238. The nation may grant him the use and property of
her common possessions,
110
239. or allow him the domain, and reserve to herself
the use of them,
110
240. Taxes,
111


32
original contents
Sect. 241. The nation may reserve to herself the right
of imposing them,
page 111
242. Sovereign possessing that power,
111
243. Duties of the prince with respect to taxes,
112
244. Eminent domain annexed to the sovereignty,
<xxx>
112
245. Dominion over public property,
113
246. The sovereign may make laws respecting the use of
things possessed in common,
113
247. Alienation of the property of a corporation,
113
248. Use of common property,
114
249. How each member is to enjoy it,
114
250. Right of anticipation in the use of it,
114
251. The same right in another case,
114
252. Preservation and repairs of common possessions,
115
253. Duty and right of the sovereign in that respect,
115
254. Private property,
115
255. The sovereign may subject it to regulations
of police,
115
256. Inheritances,
116
chapter xxi
Of the Alienation of the public Property, or the
Domain, and that of a Part of the State.
257. The nation may alienate her public property,
116
258. Duties of the nation in that respect,
116
259. Duties of the prince,
117
260. He cannot alienate the public property,
117
261. The nation may give him a right to do it,
117
262. Rules on that subject with respect to treaties
between nation and nation,
117
263. Alienation of a part of the state,
118
264. Rights of the dismembered party,
118
265. Whether the prince has power to dismember
the state,
119
chapter xxii
Of Rivers, Streams, and Lakes.
266. A river that separates two territories,
120
267. Bed of a river which is dried up or takes
another course,
121

original contents
33
Sect. 268. Right of alluvion,
page 121
269. Whether alluvion produces any change in the right
to river,
121
270. Consequence of a river changing its bed,
122
271. Works tending to turn the current,
122
272. or generally prejudicial to the rights of others,
122
273. Rules relative to interfering rights,
122
274. Lakes,
123
275. Increase of a lake,
123
276. Land formed on the banks of a lake,
125
277. Bed of a lake dried up,
125
278. Jurisdiction over lakes and rivers,
125
book ii: nations in relation to other states
the established usage requires, and positive acts of disrespect and insult.
The prince may complain of an instance of neglect, and, if it be not
repaired, may consider it as an indication of ill-will: he has a right to
demand, even by force of arms, the reparation of an insult. The czar
Peter the First,16 in his manifesto against Sweden, complained that the
cannon had not been ﬁred on his passing at Riga. He might think it
strange that they did not pay him this mark of respect, and he might
complain of it; but to have made this the subject of a war, must have
indicated a preposterous prodigality of human blood.
chapter iv
Of the Right to Security, and the Effects of the
Sovereignty and Independence of nations.
In vain does nature prescribe to nations, as well as to individuals, the
care of self-preservation, and of advancing their own perfection and
happiness, if she does not give them a right to preserve themselves from
every thing that might render this care ineffectual. This right is nothing
more than a moral power of acting, that is, the power of doing what is
morally possible,—what is proper and conformable to our duties. We
have then in general a right to do whatever is necessary to the discharge
of our duties. Every nation, as well as every man, has therefore a right
to prevent other nations from obstructing her preservation, her perfec-
tion, and happiness,—that is, to preserve herself from all injuries (§18):
and this right is a perfect one, since it is given to satisfy a natural and
indispensable obligation: for when we cannot use constraint in order to
cause our rights to be respected, their effects are very uncertain. It is this
right to preserve herself from all injury that is called the right to security.
It is safest to prevent the evil, when it can be prevented. A nation
has a right to resist an injurious attempt, and to make use of force and
every honourable expedient against whosoever is actually engaged in
16. Czar Peter I (r. 1682–1725) joined an alliance in 1700 with Denmark-Norway
and Saxony against Sweden, inaugurating the Great Northern War (1700–1721).
§49. Right
to security.
§50. It pro-
duces the right
of resistance;


chapter iv
289
opposition to her, and even to anticipate his machinations, observing,
however, not to attack him upon vague and uncertain suspicions, lest
she should incur the imputation of becoming herself an unjust ag-
gressor. <155>
When the evil is done, the same right to security authorises the of-
fended party to endeavour to obtain a complete reparation, and to em-
ploy force for that purpose, if necessary.
Finally, the offended party have a right to provide for their future
security, and to chastise the offender, by inﬂicting upon him a punish-
ment capable of deterring him thenceforward from similar aggressions,
and of intimidating those who might be tempted to imitate him. They
may even, if necessary, disable the aggressor from doing further injury.
They only make use of their right in allthese measures,whichtheyadopt
with good reason: and if evil thence results tohimwhohasreducedthem
to the necessity of taking such steps, he must impute the consequences
only to his own injustice.
If then there is any-where a nation of a restless and mischievous dis-
position, ever ready to injure others, to traverse their designs, and to
excite domestic disturbances in their dominions,—it is not to be
doubted that all the others have a right to form a coalition in order to
repress and chastise that nation, and to put it forever after out of her
power to injure them. Such would be the just fruits of the policy which
Machiavel praises in Caesar Borgia. The conduct followed by Philip II.
king of Spain, was calculated to unite all Europe against him; and it was
from just reasons that Henry the Great formed the design of humbling
a power, whose strength was formidable, and whose maxims were
pernicious.
The three preceding propositions are so many principles, thatfurnish
the various foundations for a just war, as we shall see in the proper place.
It is an evident consequence of the liberty and independence of na-
tions, that all have a right to be governed as they think proper, and that
no state has the smallest right to interfere in the government of another.
Of all the rights that can belong to a nation, sovereignty is, doubtless,
the most precious, and that which other nations ought the most scru-
pulously to respect, if they would not do her an injury.
§51. and that
of obtaining
reparation;
§52. and the
right of
punishing.
§53. Right
of all nations
against a
mischievous
people.
§54. No
nation has a
right to inter-
fere in the
government of
another state.


290
book ii: nations in relation to other states
The sovereign is he to whom the nation has intrusted the empire,and
the care of the government: she has invested him with her rights; she
alone is directly interested in the manner in which the conductor shehas
chosen makes use of his power. It does not then belong to any foreign
power to take cognisance of the administration of that sovereign, to set
himself up for a judge of his conduct, and to oblige him to alter it. If
he loads his subjects with taxes, and if he treats them with severity, the
nation alone is concerned in the business; and no other is called upon
to oblige him to amend his conduct, and follow more wise and equitable
maxims. It is the part of prudence to point out the occasions when of-
ﬁciousand amicablerepresentationsmaybemadetohim.TheSpaniards
violated all rules, when they set themselves up as judges of the Inca
Athualpa.17 If that prince had violated the law of nations with respect
to them, they would <156> have had a right to punish him. But they
accused him of having put some of his subjects to death, of having had
several wives, &c.—things, for which he was not at all accountable to
them; and, to ﬁll up the measure of their extravagant injustice,theycon-
demned him by the laws of Spain.*
But if the prince, by violating the fundamental laws, giveshissubjects
a legal right to resist him,—if tyranny becoming insupportable obliges
the nation to rise in their own defence,—every foreign power has a right
to succour an oppressed people who implore their assistance. The En-
glish justly complained of James II. The nobility and the most distin-
guished patriots, having determined to check him in the prosecution of
his schemes, which manifestly tendedtooverthrowtheconstitution,and
to destroy the liberties and the religion of the people,—applied for as-
sistance to the United Provinces. The authority of the prince of Orange
had, doubtless, an inﬂuence on the deliberations of the states-general;
but it did not lead them to the commission of an act of injustice: for
when a people from good reasons take up arms against an oppressor, it
is but an act of justice and generosity to assist brave men in the defence
of their liberties. Whenever therefore matters are carried so far as to pro-
17. Atahualpa, the last of the Incan emperors, was executed in 1533.
* Garcillasso de la Vega.
§55. One
sovereign
cannot make
himself the
judge of the
conduct of
another.
§56. How far
lawful to in-
terfere in a
quarrel
between a
sovereign and
his subjects.


chapter iv
291
duce a civil war, foreign powers may assist that party which appears to
them to have justice on its side. He who assists an odious tyrant,—he
who declares for an unjust and rebellious people,—violates his duty.But
when the bands of the political society are broken, or at least suspended,
between the sovereign and his people, the contending parties may then
be considered as two distinct powers; and since they are both equally
independent of all foreign authority, nobody has a right to judge them.
Either may be in the right; and each of those who grant their assistance
may imagine that he is acting in support of the better cause. It follows
then, in virtue of the voluntary law of nations (see Prelim. §21), that the
two parties may act as having an equal right, and behave to each other
accordingly, till the decision of the affair.
But we ought not to abuse this maxim, and make a handle of it to
authorise odious machinations against the internal tranquillity of states.
It is a violation of the law of nations to invite those subjects to revolt
who actually pay obedience to their sovereign, though they complain of
his government.
The practice of nations is conformable to our maxims. When the
German protestants came to the assistance of the reformed party in
France, the court never attempted to treat them otherwise than on the
usual footing of enemies in general, and according to the laws of war.
France was at the same time engaged in assisting the Netherlands then
in arms against Spain,—and expected that her troops should be consid-
ered in no other light than as auxiliaries in a regular war. But no power
ever fails to complain, as of an atrocious wrong, if any one attempts by
his emissaries to excite his subjects to revolt. <157>
As to those monsters who, under the title of sovereigns, renderthem-
selves the scourges and horror of the human race, they are savage beasts,
whom everybravemanmayjustlyexterminatefromthefaceof theearth.
All antiquity has praised Hercules for delivering the world from an An-
taeus, a Busiris, and a Diomede.18
18. Antaeus, Libyan giant and son of Poseidon; Busiris, king of Egypt and son of
Poseidon; and Diomede, king of Thrace, known for owning man-eating horses.


292
book ii: nations in relation to other states
After having established the position that foreign nations have no
right to interfere in the government of an independent state, it is not
difﬁcult to prove that the latter has a right to oppose such interference.
To govern herself according to her own pleasure, is a necessary part of
her independence. A sovereign state cannot be constrained in this re-
spect, except it be from a particular right which she has herself given to
other states by her treaties; and even if she has given them such a right,
yet it cannot, in an affair of so delicate a nature as that of government,
be extended beyond the clear and express terms of the treaties. In every
other case a sovereign has a right to treat those as enemies, who attempt
to interfere in his domestic affairs otherwise than by their good ofﬁces.
Religion is in every sense an object of great importance to a nation,
and one of the most interesting subjects on which the government can
be employed. An independent people are accountable for their religion
to God alone: in this particular, as in every other, they have a right to
regulate their conduct according to the dictates of their own conscience,
and to prevent all foreign interference inanaffairof sodelicateanature.*
The custom, long kept up in Christendom, of causing all the affairs of
religion to be decided and regulated in a general council,couldonlyhave
been introduced by the singular circumstance of the submission of the
whole church to the same civil government,—theRomanempire.When
that empire was overthrown, and gave place to many independent king-
doms, this custom was found contrary to the ﬁrst principles of govern-
ment, to the very idea of independent states, and political societies. It
was, however, long supported by prejudice, ignorance and superstition,
by the authority of the popes, and the power of the clergy, and still
respected even at the time of the reformation. The states who had em-
* When, however, we see a party inﬂamed with deadly hatred against the religion
we profess, and a neighbouring prince persecuting in consequence the professors of
that religion, it is lawful for us to give assistance to the sufferers,—as it was well re-
marked by James I. of England [[1603–25]] to Bouillon the ambassador of Mary de
Medici, queen regent of France [[1600–1610]],—“When my neighbours areattacked
in a quarrel in which I am interested, the law of nature requires that I should an-
ticipate and prevent the evil which may thence result to myself.” Le Vassor, Hist.
of Louis XIII. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§57. Right of
opposing the
interference of
foreign powers
in the affairs of
government.
§58. The same
rights with
respect to
religion.


chapter iv
293
braced the reformed religion offered to submit to the decisions of an
impartial council lawfully assembled. At present they would not hesitate
to declare, that, in matters of religion, they are equally independent of
every power on earth, as they are in the affairs of civil government. The
general and absolute authority of the pope and council is absurd inevery
other system <158> than that of those popes who strove to unite all
Christendom in a single body, of which they pretended to be the su-
preme monarchs.* But even catholic sovereigns have endeavoured to re-
strain that authority within such limits as are consistent with their su-
preme power: they do not receive the decrees of council or the popes’
bulls, till they have caused them to be examined; and these ecclesiastical
laws are of no force in their dominions unless conﬁrmed by the prince.
In the ﬁrst book of this work, Chap. XII. wehavesufﬁcientlyestablished
the rights of a state in matters of religion; and we introduce them here
again, only to draw just consequences from them with respect to the
conduct which nations ought to observe towards each other.
It is then certain, that we cannot, in opposition to the will of anation,
interfere in her religious concerns, without violating her rights, and do-
ing her an injury. Much less are we allowed to employ force of arms to
oblige her to receive a doctrine and a worship which we consider as di-
vine. What right have men to set themselves up as the defenders and
protectors of the cause of God? He can, whenever he pleases, lead na-
tions to the knowledge of himself, by more effectual means than those
of violence. Persecutors make no true converts. The monstrous maxim
of extending religion by the sword is a subversion of the rights of man-
kind, and the most terrible scourge of nations. Every madmanwillfancy
he is ﬁghting in the cause of God, and every aspiring spirit will use that
pretext as a cloak for his ambition. While Charlemagne was ravaging
Saxony with ﬁre and sword in order to plant christianity there, the suc-
cessors of Mahomet were ravaging Asia and Africa, to establish the Ko-
ran in those parts.
* See, above, §146, and Bodinus’s Republic, book i. chap. ix. with his quotations,
p. m. 139.
§59. No
nation can be
constrained
with respect
to religion.

294
book ii: nations in relation to other states
But it is an ofﬁce of humanity to labour by mild and lawful means
to persuade a nation to receive a religion which we believe to be the only
one that is true and salutary. Missionaries may be sent to instruct the
people; and this care is altogether conformable to the attention which
every nation owes to the perfection and happiness of others. But it must
be observed, that, in order to avoid doing an injury to the rights of a
sovereign, the missionaries ought to abstain from preaching clandes-
tinely, or without his permission, a new doctrine to his people. He may
refuse to accept their proffered services; and if he orders them to leave
his dominions, they oughttoobey. They shouldhaveaveryexpressorder
from the King of kings, before they can lawfully disobey asovereignwho
commands according to the extent of his power: and the prince who is
not convinced of that extraordinary order of the Deity, will do no more
than exert his lawful rights, in punishing a missionary for disobedience.
But what if the nation, or a considerable part of the people, are desirous
of retaining the missionary, and following his doctrine?—In a former
part of this work (Book I. §§128–136) we have established the rights of
the nation and those of <159> the citizens: and thither we refer for an
answer to this question.
This is a very delicate subject; and we cannot authorise an inconsid-
erate zeal for making proselytes, without endangering the tranquillityof
all nations, and even exposing those who are engaged in making con-
verts, to act inconsistently with their duty, at the very time they imagine
they are accomplishing the most meritorious work. For it is certainly
performing a very bad ofﬁce to a nation, and doing her an essential in-
jury, to spread a false and dangerous religion among the inhabitants.
Now there is no person who does not believe his own religion to be the
only true and safe one. Recommend, kindle in all hearts the ardent zeal
of the missionaries, and you will see Europe inundated with Lamas,
Bonzes and Dervises, while monks of all kinds will over-run Asia and
Africa. Protestant ministers will crowd to Spain and Italy, in deﬁance of
the inquisition, while the jesuits will spread themselves among the pro-
testants in order to bring them back into the pale of the church. Let the
catholics reproach the protestants as much as they please with theirluke-
warmness, the conduct of the latter is undoubtedly more agreeable to
§60. Ofﬁces of
humanity in
these matters.
Missionaries.
§61. Circum-
spection to
be used.
chapter iv
295
reason and the law of nations. True zeal applies itself to the task of mak-
ing a holy religion ﬂourish in the countries where it is received, and of
rendering it useful to the manners of the people and to the state: and,
without forestalling the dispositions of providence, it can ﬁnd sufﬁcient
employment at home, until an invitation come from foreign nations, or
a very evident commission be given from heaven, to preach that religion
abroad. Finally, let us add, that, before we can lawfully undertake to
preach a particular religion to the various nations of the earth, we must
ourselves be thoroughly convinced of its truth by the most serious ex-
amination.—“What! can christians doubt of their religion?”—TheMa-
hometan entertains no doubt of his. Be ever readytoimpartyourknowl-
edge,—simply and sincerely expose the principles of your belief tothose
who are desirous of hearing you: instruct them, convince them by evi-
dence, but seek not to hurry them away with the ﬁre of enthusiasm. It
is a sufﬁcient charge on each of us, to be responsible for his own con-
science.—Thus neither will the light of knowledge be refused to any
who wish to receive it, nor will a turbulent zeal disturb the peace of
nations.
When a religion is persecuted in one country, foreign nations who
profess it may intercede for their brethren: but this is all theycanlawfully
do, unless the persecution be carried to anintolerableexcess:thenindeed
it becomes a case of manifest tyranny, in opposition to which all nations
are allowed to assist an unhappy people (§56). A regard to their own
safety may also authorise them to undertake the defence of the perse-
cuted sufferers. A king of France replied to the ambassadors who solic-
ited him to suffer his subjects of the reformed religion to live in peace,
“that he was master in his own kingdom.” But the <160> protestant
sovereigns, who saw a general conspiracy of the catholics obstinately
bent on their destruction, were so far masters on their side as to be at
liberty to give assistance to a body of men who might strengthen their
party, and help them to preserve themselves from the ruin with which
they were threatened. All distinctions of states and nations are to be
disregarded, when there is question of forming a coalition against a set
of madmen, who would exterminate all those that do not implicitly re-
ceive their doctrines.
§62. What a
sovereign may
do in favour
of those who
profess his
religion in
another state.


296
book ii: nations in relation to other states
chapter v
Of the Observance of Justice between Nations.
Justice is the basis of all society, the sure bond of all commerce. Human
society, far from being an intercourse of assistance and good ofﬁces,
would be no longer any thing but a vast scene of robbery, if no respect
were paid to this virtue, which secures to every one his own. It is still
more necessary between nations, than between individuals; because in-
justice produces more dreadful consequences in the quarrels of these
powerful bodies politic, and it is more difﬁcult to obtain redress. The
obligation imposed on all men to be just is easily demonstrated fromthe
law of nature. We here take that obligation for granted (as being sufﬁ-
ciently known), and content ourselves with observing, that it is not only
indispensably binding on nations (Prelim. §5), but even still more sacred
with respect to them, from the importance of its consequences.
All nations are therefore under a strict obligation to cultivate justice
towards each other, to observe it scrupulously, and carefully to abstain
from every thing that may violate it. Each ought to render to the others
what belongs to them, to respect their rights, and to leave them in the
peaceable enjoyment of them.*
From this indispensable obligation which nature imposes on nations,
as well as from those obligations which each nation owes to herself, re-
sults the right of every state, not to suffer any of her rights to be taken
away, or any thing which lawfully be-<161>longs to her: for in opposing
* Might not this duty be extended to the execution of sentences passed in other
countries according to the necessary and usual forms?—On this subject, M.VanBeu-
ningen wrote as follows to M. De Witt, Oct. 15, 1666. “By what the courts of Holland
have decreed in the affair of one Koningh of Rotterdam, I see they suppose thatevery
judgment pronounced by the parliaments of France against the inhabitants of Hol-
land in judicio contradictorio, ought to be executed on requisition made by those
parliaments. But I do not know that the tribunals of this country act in the same
manner with respect to sentences passed in Holland: and if they donot,anagreement
might be made, that sentences passed on either side against subjects of the other state
shall only take effect on such property as the condemned party is found to possess in
the state where the sentence has been given.” [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.]]
§63. Necessity
of the obser-
vance of
justice in
human society.
§64. Obliga-
tion of all
nations to
cultivate and
observe justice.
§65. Right of
refusing to
submit to
injustice.

chapter v
297
this, she only acts in conformity to all her duties; and therein consists
the right (§49).
This right is a perfect one,—that is to say, it is accompanied with the
right of using force in order to assert it. In vain would nature give us a
right to refuse submitting to injustice,—in vain would she oblige others
to be just in their dealings with us, if we could not lawfully make use of
force, when they refused to discharge this duty. The just would lie at the
mercy of avarice and injustice, and all their rights would soon become
useless.
From the foregoing right arise, as distinct branches, ﬁrst, the right of
a just defence, which belongs to every nation,—or the right of making
use of force against whoever attacks her and her rights. This is the foun-
dation of defensive war.
Secondly, the right to obtain justice by force, if we cannot obtain it
otherwise, or to pursue our right by force of arms. This is thefoundation
of offensive war.
An intentional act of injustice is undoubtedly aninjury.Wehavethen
a right to punish it, as we have shewn above, in speaking of injuries in
general (§52). The right of refusing to suffer injustice is a branch of the
right to security.
Let us apply to the unjust what we have said above (§53) of a mis-
chievous nation. If there were a people who made open profession of
trampling justice under foot,—who despised and violated the rights of
others whenever they found an opportunity,—the interest of human
society would authorise all the other nations to form a confederacy in
order to humble and chastise the delinquents. We do not here forget the
maxim established in our Preliminaries, that it does not belong to na-
tions to usurp the power of being judges of each other. In particular
cases, where there is room for the smallest doubt, it ought tobesupposed
that each of the parties may have some right: and the injustice of the
party that has committed the injury may proceed from error, and not
from a general contempt of justice. But if, by her constant maxims, and
by the whole tenor of her conduct, a nation evidently proves herself to
be actuated by that mischievous disposition,—if she regards no right as
sacred,—the safety of the human race requires that she should be re-
§66. This
right is a
perfect one.
§67. It
produces
1. The right
of defence.
§68. 2. The
right of doing
ourselves
justice.
§69. The right
of punishing
injustice.
§70. Right of
all nations
against one
that openly
despises
justice.


298
book ii: nations in relation to other states
pressed. To form and support an unjust pretension, is only doing an
injury to the party whose interests are affected by that pretension; but
to despise justice in general, is doing an injury to all nations.
chapter vi
Of the Concern a Nation may have in the
Actions of her Citizens.
We have seen in the preceding chapters what are the common duties of
nations towards each other,—how they ought mutually to respect each
other, and to abstain from all injury, <162> and all offence,—and how
justice and equity ought to reign between them in their whole conduct.
But hitherto we have only considered the actions of the body of the
nation, of the state, of the sovereign. Private persons, who are members
of one nation, may offend and ill-treat the citizens of another, and may
injure a foreign sovereign:—it remains for us to examine, what share a
state may have in the actions of her citizens, and what are the rights and
obligations of sovereigns in this respect.
Whoever offends the state, injures its rights, disturbs its tranquillity,
or does it a prejudice in any manner whatsoever, declares himself its
enemy, and exposes himself to be justly punished for it. Whoever uses
a citizen ill, indirectly offends the state, which is bound to protect this
citizen; and the sovereign of the latter should avenge his wrongs, punish
the aggressor, and, if possible, oblige him to make full reparation; since
otherwise the citizen would not obtain the great end of the civil asso-
ciation, which is safety.
But, on the other hand, the nation or the sovereignoughtnottosuffer
the citizens to do an injury to the subjects of another state, much less
to offend thatstateitself:—andthis,notonlybecausenosovereignought
to permit those who are under his command to violate the precepts of
the law of nature, which forbids all injuries,—but also because nations
ought mutually to respect each other, to abstain from all offence, from
all injury, from all wrong,—in a word, from every thing that may be of
§71. The
sovereign
ought to
revenge the
injuries of the
state, and to
protect the
citizens.
§72. He ought
not to suffer
his subjects to
offend other
nations or
their citizens.


chapter vi
299
prejudice to others. If a sovereign, who might keep his subjects within
the rules of justice and peace, suffers them to injure a foreign nation
either in its body or its members, he does no less injury to that nation,
than if he injured it himself. In short, the safety of the state, and that
of human society, requires this attention from every sovereign. If you
let loose the reins to your subjects against foreign nations, these will be-
have in the same manner to you; and, instead of thatfriendlyintercourse
which nature has established between all men, we shall see nothing but
one vast and dreadful scene of plunder between nation and nation.
However, as it is impossible for thebestregulatedstate,orforthemost
vigilant and absolute sovereign, to model at his pleasure all the actions
of his subjects, and to conﬁne them on every occasion to the most exact
obedience, it would be unjust to impute to the nation or the sovereign
every fault committed by the citizens. We ought not then to say in gen-
eral, that we have received an injury from a nation, because we have
received it from one of its members.
But if a nation or its chief approves and ratiﬁes the act of the indi-
vidual, it then becomes a public concern; and the injured party is to
consider the nation as the real author of the injury, of which the citizen
was perhaps only the instrument.
If the offended state has in her power the individual who has done
the injury, she may without scruple bring him to justice and punishhim.
If he has escaped and returned to his own <163> country, she ought to
apply to his sovereign to have justice done in the case.
And since the latter ought not to suffer his subjects to molest the
subjects of other states, or to do them an injury, much less to give open,
audacious offence to foreign powers,—he ought to compel the trans-
gressor to make reparation for the damage or injury, if possible, or to
inﬂict on him an exemplary punishment, or, ﬁnally, according to the
nature and circumstances of the case, to deliver him up to the offended
state, to be there brought to justice. This is pretty generally observed
with respect to great crimes, which are equally contrary to the laws and
safety of all nations. Assassins, incendiaries, and robbers, areseizedevery
where, at the desire of the sovereign in whose territories the crime was
committed, and are delivered up to his justice. The matter is carried still
§73. The acts
of individuals
are not to be
imputed to
the nation,
§74. unless it
approves or
ratiﬁes them.
§75. Conduct
to be observed
by the offended
party.
§76. Duty of
the aggressor’s
sovereign.

300
book ii: nations in relation to other states
farther in states that are more closely connected by friendship and good
neighbourhood. Even in cases of ordinary transgressions which are only
subjects of civil prosecution either with a view to the recovery of dam-
ages or the inﬂiction of a slight civil punishment, the subjects of two
neighbouring states are reciprocally obliged to appear before the mag-
istrate of the place where they are accused of having failed in their duty.
Upon a requisition of that magistrate, called Letters Rogatory, they are
summoned in due form by their own magistrates, and obliged toappear.
An admirable institution, by means of which many neighbouring states
live together in peace, and seem to form only one republic! This is in
force throughout all Switzerland. As soon as the Letters Rogatory are
issued in form, the superior of the accused is bound to enforce them. It
belongs not to him to examine whether the accusation be true or false;
he is to presume on the justice of his neighbour, and not suffer any
doubts on his own part to impair an institution so well calculated to
preserve harmony and good understanding between the states: however,
if by constant experience he should ﬁnd that his subjects are oppressed
by the neighbouring magistrates who summon them before their tri-
bunals, it would undoubtedly be right in him to reﬂect on theprotection
due to his people, and to refuse the rogatories till satisfaction were given
for the abuses committed, and proper steps taken to prevent a repetition
of them. But in such case it would be his duty to allege his reasons, and
set them forth in the clearest point of view.
The sovereign whorefuses tocausereparationtobemadeforthedam-
age done by his subject, or to punish the offender, or, ﬁnally, to deliver
him up, renders himself in some measure an accomplice in the injury,
and becomes responsible for it. But if he delivers up either the property
of the offender as an indemniﬁcation in cases that will admit of pecu-
niary compensation,—or his person, inorderthathemaysufferthepun-
ishment due to his crime,—the offended party has no further demand
on him. King Demetrius19 having delivered to the Romans those <164>
who had killed their ambassador, the senate sent them back, resolving
to reserve to themselves the liberty of punishing that crime by avenging
19. Greco-Bactrian king, r. ca. 200–180 b.c.
§77. If he
refuses justice,
he becomes a
party in the
fault and
offence.


chapter vii
301
it on the king himself, or on his dominions.* If this was really the case,
and if the king had no share in the murder of the Roman ambassador,
the conduct of the senate was highly unjust, and only worthy of men
who sought but a pretext to cover their ambitious enterprises.
Finally, there is another case where the nation in general is guilty of
the crimes of its members. That is when by its manners and by the max-
ims of its government it accustoms and authorises its citizensindiscrim-
inately to plunder and maltreat foreigners, to make inroads into the
neighbouring countries, &c. Thus the nation of the Usbecks is guilty
of all the robberies committed by the individuals of which it is com-
posed. The princes whose subjects are robbed and massacred, andwhose
lands are infested by those robbers, may justly level their vengeance
against the nation at large. Nay more, all nations have a right to enter
into a league against such a people, to repress them, and to treat them
as the common enemies of the human race. The christian nationswould
be no less justiﬁable in forming a confederacy against the states of Bar-
bary, in order to destroy those haunts of pirates, with whom the love of
plunder, or the fear of just punishment, is the only rule of peace and
war. But these piratical adventurers are wise enough to respectthosewho
are most able to chastise them; and the nations that are able to keep the
avenues of a rich branch of commerce open for themselves, arenotsorry
to see them shut against others.
chapter vii
Effects of the Domain, between Nations.
We have explained in Chap. XVIII. Book I. how a nation takes posses-
sion of a country, and at the same time gains possession of the domain
and government thereof. That country, with every thing included in it,
becomes the property of the nation in general. Let us now see what are
the effects of this property, with respect to other nations. The full do-
* See Polybius, quoted by Barbeyrac, in his notes on Grotius, book iii. chap. xxiv.
§vii.
§78. Another
case in which
the nation is
guilty of the
crimes of the
citizens.
§79. General
effect of the
domain.


302
book ii: nations in relation to other states
main is necessarily a peculiar and exclusive right: for if I have a full right
to dispose of a thing as I please, it thence follows that others have no
right to it at all, since, if they had any, I could not freely dispose of it.
The private domain of the citizens may be limited and restrained in
several ways by the laws of the state, and it always is so by the eminent
domain of the sovereign; but the general domain of the nation is full
and absolute, since there exists no authority upon earth by which it can
be limited: it therefore excludes all right on the part of foreigners. And
as the rights of a nation ought to <165> be respected by all others (§64),
none can form any pretensions to the country which belongs to that
nation, nor ought to dispose of it, without her consent, any more than
of the things contained in the country.
The domain of the nation extends to every thing she possesses by a
just title: it comprehends her ancient and original possessions and allher
acquisitions made by means which are just in themselves, or admitted
as such amongnations,—concessions,purchases,conquestsmadeinreg-
ular war, &c. And by her possessions, we ought not only to understand
her territories, but all the rights she enjoys.
Even the property of the individuals is in the aggregate, to be con-
sidered as the property of the nation, with respect to other states. It, in
some sort, really belongs to her from the right she has over the property
of her citizens, because it constitutes a part of thesum totalof herriches,
and augments her power. She is interested in that property by her ob-
ligationtoprotectallhermembers.Inshort,itcannotbeotherwise,since
nations act and treat together as bodies, in their quality of political so-
cieties, and are considered as so many moral persons. All those whoform
a society, a nation, being considered by foreign nations as constituting
only one whole, one single person,—all their wealth together can only
be considered as the wealth of that same person. And this is so true, that
each political society may, if it pleases, establish within itself a com-
munity of goods, as Campanella20 did in his republic of the sun. Others
20. Tommaso Campanella, 1568–1639, unorthodox natural philosopherandtheo-
logian, wrote The City of the Sun (La citta` des sole, 1623) while imprisoned by the
Inquisition.
§80. What is
comprehended
in the domain
of a nation.
§81. The
property of
the citizens is
the property of
the nation,
with respect to
foreign nations.


chapter vii
303
willnotinquirewhatit doesinthisrespect:itsdomesticregulationsmake
no change in its rights with respect to foreigners, nor in the manner in
which they ought to consider the aggregate of its property, in what way
soever it is possessed.
By an immediate consequence of this principle, if one nation has a
right to any part of the property of another, she has an indiscriminate
right to the property of the citizens of the latter nation, until the debt
be discharged. This maxim is of great use, as shall hereafter be shewn.
The general domain of the nation over the lands she inhabits is nat-
urally connected with the empire: for in establishing herself in a vacant
country, the nation certainly does not intend to possess it in subjection
to any other power: and can we suppose an independent nation not
vested with the absolute command in her domestic concerns? Thus we
have already observed (Book I. §205) that in taking possession of acoun-
try the nation is presumed to take possession of its government at the
same time. We shall here proceed farther, and shew the natural connec-
tion of these two rightsinanindependentnation.Howcouldshegovern
herself at her own pleasure in the country she inhabits, if she cannottruly
and absolutely dispose of it? And how could she have thefullandabsolute
domain of aplacewhereshehasnotthecommand?Another’ssovereignty,
and the rights it comprehends, must deprive her of the free disposal of
that place. Add <166> to this the eminent domain which constitutes a
part of the sovereignty (Book I. §244), and you will the better perceive
the intimate connection existing between the domain and thesovereignty
of the nation. And, accordingly, what is called the high domain, which is
nothing but the domain of the body of the nation, or of the sovereign
who represents it, is every where considered as inseparable from the sov-
ereignty. The useful domain, or the domain conﬁned to the rights that
may belong to an individual in the state, may be separated from the sov-
ereignty: and nothing prevents the possibility of its belonging to anation,
in places that are not under her jurisdiction. Thus many sovereigns have
ﬁefs, and other possessions, in the territories of another prince: in these
cases they possess them in the manner of private individuals.
The sovereignty united to the domain establishes the jurisdiction of
the nation in her territories, or the country that belongs to her. It is her
§82. A conse-
quence of this
principle.
§83. Connec-
tion of the
domain of the
nation with the
sovereignty.
§84.
Jurisdiction.


304
book ii: nations in relation to other states
province, or that of her sovereign, to exercise justice in all the places
under her jurisdiction, to take cognisance of the crimes committed,and
the differences that arise in the country.
Other nations ought to respect this right. And as the administration
of justice necessarily requires that every deﬁnitive sentence, regularly
pronounced, be esteemed just, and executed as such,—when once a
cause in which foreigners are interested, has been decided in form, the
sovereign of the defendants cannot hear their complaints. To undertake
to examine the justice of a deﬁnitive sentence, is an attack on the juris-
diction of him who has passed it. The prince therefore ought not to
interfere in the causes of hissubjectsinforeigncountries,andgrantthem
his protection, excepting in cases where justice is refused, or palpable
and evident injustice done, or rules and forms openlyviolated,or,ﬁnally,
an odious distinction made to the prejudice of his subjects, or of for-
eigners in general. The British court established this maxim, with great
strength of evidence, on occasion of the Prussian vessels seized and de-
clared lawful prizes during the last war.* What is here said has norelation
to the merits of that particular cause, since they must depend on facts.
In consequence of these rights of jurisdiction, the decisions made by
the judge of the place within the extent of his power, ought to be re-
spected, and to take effect even in foreign countries. For instance, it be-
longs to the domestic judge to nominate tutors and guardiansforminors
and idiots. The law of nations, which has an eye to the common ad-
* See the report made to the king of Great Britain by Sir George Lee, Dr. Paul,
Sir Dudley Ryder and Mr. Murray. It is an excellent piece on the law of nations. [[In
his lectures on international law at Cambridge in 1887, Henry Summer Maine men-
tions this report: “The English Secretary of State at once addressed to him,forPrussia
was a friendly Power at the time, a letter dated February 8, 1753, in which he dwells
upon the unprecedented nature of the proceeding, and states that he has the King’s
orders to send to the King of Prussia a report made to his Majesty by Sir George Lee,
Judge of the Prerogative Court; Dr. Paul,hisMajesty’sAdvocate-General;SirDudley
Ryder, and Mr. Murray—the Mr. Murray who afterwards became Lord Mansﬁeld.
The report in question is one of which British lawyers and the British ForeignOfﬁce
have always been exceedingly proud. It is praised by two great foreign authorities of
the time—Vattel and Montesquieu; they both of them speak of it as admirable; it
is, in fact, a most excellent example of the method of reasoning of which Interna-
tional Law admits; and in the end the King of Prussia gave way to its arguments, and
the interest on the Silesian loan was ever afterwards punctually paid.”]]
§85. Effects of
the jurisdiction
in foreign
countries.


chapter vii
305
vantage and the good harmony of nations, requires therefore that such
nomination of a tutor or guardian be valid and acknowledged in all
countries where the pupil may have any concerns. Use was made of this
maxim in the year 1672, even with respect to a sovereign. The abbe´
D’Orle´ans, sovereign prince of Neufchatel in Switzerland, <167> being
incapable of managing his own affairs, the king of France appointed, as
his guardian, his mother, the duchess dowager of Longueville. The
duchess of Nemours, sister to that prince, laid claim to the guardianship
fortheprincipalityof Neufchatel:butthetitleof theduchessof Longue-
ville was acknowledged by the three estates of the country. Her counsel
rested her cause on the circumstance of her having been nominated
guardian by the domestic judge.* This was a very wrong application of
a just principle: for the prince’s domestic residence could be no where
but in his state: and it was only by the degree of the three estates, who
alone had a right to chuse a guardian for their sovereign, that the au-
thority of the duchess of Longueville became ﬁrm and lawful at
Neufchatel.
In the same manner the validity of a testament, as to its form, can
only be decided by the domestic judge, whose sentencedeliveredinform
ought to be every where acknowledged. But, without affecting the va-
lidityof thetestamentitself,thebequestscontainedinitmaybedisputed
before the judge of the place where the effects are situated, becausethose
effects can only be disposed of conformably to the laws of the country.
Thus the abbe´ D’Orle´ans above mentioned having appointed theprince
of Conti21 his universal legatee,—the three estates of Neufchatel, with-
out waiting till the parliament of Paris should pronounce their decision
on the question of two contradictory wills made by the abbe´ D’Orle´ans,
gave the investiture of the principality to the duchess of Nemours,—
declaring that the sovereignty was unalienable. Besides, it might have
been said on this occasion also, that the domestic residence of theprince
could be no where but in the state.
21. Armand de Bourbon, prince of Conti (1629–66). He was the second son of
Henry II, prince of Conde´ (1588–1646), and the brother of both LouisIIdeBourbon,
prince of Conde´ (1621–86) and Anne Genevie`ve Bourbon Conde´ (1619–79).
* Memorial in behalf of the Duchess of Longueville, 1672.

306
book ii: nations in relation to other states
As every thing included in the country belongs to the nation,—and
as none but the nation, or the person on whom she has devolved her
right, is authorised to dispose of those things (§79),—if she has left un-
cultivated and desert places in the country, no person whatever has a
right to take possession of them without her consent. Though she does
not make actual use of them, those places still belong to her: she has an
interest in preserving them for future use, and is not accountable to any
person for the manner in which she makes use of her property. It is,
however, necessary to recollect here what we have observed above (Book
I. §81). No nation can lawfully appropriate to herself a too dispropor-
tionate extent of country, and reduce other nations to want subsistence,
and a place of abode. A German chief, in the time of Nero, said to the
Romans, “As heaven belongs to the gods, so the earth is given to the
human race; and desert countries are common to all,”*—giving those
proud conquerors to understand that they had no right to reserve and
appropriate to themselves a country which they left desert. The <168>
Romans had laid waste a chain of country along the Rhine, to cover
their provinces from the incursions of the barbarians. The German’s
remonstrance would have had a good foundation, had the Romans pre-
tended to keep without reason a vast country which was of no use to
them: but those lands which they would not suffer to be inhabited, serv-
ing as a rampart against savage nations, were of considerable use to the
empire.
When there is not this singular circumstance, it is equally agreeable
to the dictates of humanity, and to the particular advantage of the state,
to give those desert tracts to foreigners who are willing to clear the land
and to render it valuable. The beneﬁcence of the state thus turns to her
own advantage; she acquires new subjects, and augments her riches and
power. This is the practice in America; and, by this wise method, the
English have carried their settlements in the new world to a degree of
power, which has considerably increased that of the nation. Thus also
* Sicut coelum diis, ita terras generi mortaliumdatas;quaequevacuae,easpublicas
esse. Tacit. [[“As heaven is for the gods, so the earth has been given to mankind, and
lands uninhabited are common to all.” Annales XIII ]]
§86. Desert
and unculti-
vated places.
§87. Duty of
the nation in
this respect.


chapter vii
307
the king of Prussia endeavours to repeople his states laid waste by the
calamities of former wars.
The nation that possesses a country is at liberty to leave in the prim-
itive state of communion certain things that have as yet no owner, or to
appropriateto herself therightof possessingthosethings,aswellasevery
other advantage which that country is capable of affording. And as such
a right is of use, it is, in case of doubt, presumed that the nation has
reserved it to herself. It belongs to her then, to the exclusion of foreign-
ers, unless her laws expressly declare otherwise, as those of the Romans,
which left wild beasts, ﬁsh, &c. in the primitive state of communion.
No foreigner, therefore, has a natural right to hunt or ﬁsh in the terri-
tories of a state, to appropriate to himself a treasure found there, &c.
There exists no reason why a nation, or a sovereign if authorised by
the laws, may not grant various privileges in their territories to another
nation, or to foreigners in general, since every one may dispose of his
own property as he thinks ﬁt. Thus several sovereigns in the Indies have
granted to the trading nations of Europe the privilege of having facto-
ries, ports, and even fortresses and garrisons in certainplaceswithintheir
dominions. We may in the same manner grant the right of ﬁshing in a
river, or on the coast, that of hunting in the forests, &c. and when once
these rights have been validly ceded, they constitute a part of the pos-
sessions of him who has acquired them, and ought to be respected in
the same manner as his former possessions.
Whoever agrees that robbery is a crime, and that we are not allowed
to take forcible possession of our neighbour’s property, will acknowl-
edge, without any other proof, that no nation hasa righttoexpelanother
people from the country they inhabit, in order to settle in it herself.
Notwithstanding the extreme inequality of climatesandsoils,everypeo-
ple ought to be contented with that which has fallen to their share. Will
the conductors of nations despise a rule that constitutes all their safety
in civil society? Let <169> this sacred rule be entirely forgotten, and the
peasant will quit his thatched cottage to invade the palaces of the great,
or the delightful possessions of the rich. The antient Helvetians, dis-
contented with their native soil, burned all their habitations, and com-
menced their march, in order to establish themselves, sword in hand, in
§88. Right of
possessing
things that
have no owner.
§89. Rights
granted to
another
nation.
§90. It is not
allowable to
drive a nation
out of a
country which
it inhabits;


308
book ii: nations in relation to other states
the fertile plains of southern Gaul. But they received a terrible lesson
from a conqueror of superior abilities to themselves, and who paid still
less regard to the laws of justice. Caesar defeated them, and drove them
back into their own country. Their posterity, however, more wise than
they, conﬁne their views to the preservation of the lands and the inde-
pendence they have received from nature: they live contented; and the
labour of free hands counter-balances the sterility of the soil.
There are conquerors, who, aspiring after nothing more than the ex-
tension of the boundaries of their dominions, without expelling the in-
habitants from a country, content themselves with subduing them;—a
violence less barbarous, but not less unjust: while they spare the prop-
erty of individuals, they seize all the rights of the nation, and of the
sovereign.
Since the least encroachment on the territory of another is an act of
injustice,—in order to avoid the commission of any such act, and to
prevent every subject of discord, every occasion of quarrel, the limits of
territories ought to be marked out with clearness and precision. If those
who drew up the treaty of Utrecht22 had bestowed on so important a
subject all the attention it deserved, we should not see France and En-
gland in arms, in order to decide by a bloody war what are to be the
boundaries of their possessions in America. But the makers of treaties
often designedly leave in them some obscurity, some uncertainty, in or-
der to reserve for their nation a pretext for a rupture:—an unworthy
artiﬁce in a transaction wherein good-faith alone ought to preside! We
have also seen commissioners endeavouring to overreach or corrupt
those of a neighbouring state, in order to gain for their master an unjust
acquisition of a few leagues of territory. How can princes or ministers
stoop to dirty tricks that would dishonour a private man?
We should not only refrain from usurping the territory of others; we
should also respect it, and abstain from every act contrary to the rights
of the sovereign: for a foreign nation can claim no right in it (§79). We
cannot then, without doing an injury to a state, enter its territories with
§91. nor to
extend by
violence the
bounds of
empire.
§92. The
limits of terri-
tories ought to
be carefully
settled.
§93. Violation
of territory.
22. The Treaty of Utrecht, actually a series of separate treaties, was signed in
1713/14.


chapter vii
309
force and arms in pursuit of a criminal, and take him from thence. This
would at once be a violation of the safety of the state, and a trespass on
the rights of empire or supreme authority vested in the sovereign. This
is what is called a violation of territory; and among nationsthereisnoth-
ingmoregenerally acknowledgedasaninjurythatoughttobevigorously
repelled by every state that would not suffer itself to be oppressed. We
shall make use of this principle in speaking of war, which gives occasion
for many questions on the rights of territory. <170>
The sovereign may forbid the entrance of his territory either to for-
eigners in general, or in particular cases, or to certain persons, or for
certain particular purposes, according as he may think it advantageous
to the state. There is nothing in all this, that does not ﬂow from the
rights of domain and sovereignty: every one is obliged to pay respect to
the prohibition; and whoever dares to violate it, incurs the penalty de-
creed to render it effectual. But the prohibition ought to be known, as
well as the penalty annexed to disobedience: those who are ignorant of
it, ought to be informed of it when they approach to enter the country.
Formerly the Chinese, fearing lest the intercourse of strangers should
corrupt the manners of the nation, and impair the maxims of a wise but
singular government, forbade all people entering the empire: a prohi-
bition that was not at all inconsistent with justice, provided they did not
refuse humane assistance to those whom tempest or necessity obliged to
approach their frontiers. It was salutary to the nation, without violating
the rights of any individual, or even the duties of humanity, which per-
mit us, in case of competition, to prefer ourselves to others.
If at the same time two or more nations discover and take possession
of an island or any other desert land without an owner, they ought to
agree between themselves, and make an equitable partition; but if they
cannot agree, each will have the right of empire and the domain in the
parts in which they ﬁrst settled.
An independent individual, whether he has been driven from his
country, or has legally quitted it of his own accord, may settle in a coun-
try which he ﬁnds without an owner, and there possess an independent
domain. Whoever would afterwards make himself master of the entire
country, could not do it with justice without respecting the rights and
§94. Prohibi-
tion to enter
the territory.
§95. A country
possessed by
several nations
at the same
time.
§96. A country
possessed by a
private person.


310
book ii: nations in relation to other states
independence of this person. But if he himself ﬁnds a sufﬁcientnumber
of men who are willing to live under his laws, he may form a new state
within the country he has discovered, and possess there both thedomain
and the empire. But if this individual should arrogate to himself alone
an exclusive right to a country, there to reign monarch without subjects,
his vain pretensions would be justly held in contempt:—a rash and ri-
diculous possession can produce no real right.
There are also other means by which a private person may found a
new state. Thus, in the eleventh century, some Norman noblemen
founded a new empire in Sicily, after having wrested that island by con-
quest from the common enemies of the christian name. The custom of
the nation permitted the citizens to quit their country, in order to seek
their fortune elsewhere.
When several independent families are settled in a country, they pos-
sess the free domain, but without sovereignty, since they do not form a
political society. Nobody can seize the empire of that country; since this
would be reducing those families to subjection against their will; and no
man has a right to command men who are born free, unless they vol-
untarily submit to him. <171>
If those families have ﬁxed settlements, the place possessed by each
is the peculiar property of that family: the rest of the country, of which
they make no use, being left in the primitive state of communion, be-
longs to the ﬁrst occupant. Whoever chooses tosettlethere,maylawfully
take possession of it.
Families wandering in a country, as the nations of shepherds, and
ranging through it as their wants require, possess it in common: it be-
longs to them, to the exclusion of all other nations; and we cannotwith-
out injustice deprive them of the tracts of country of which they make
use. But let us here recollect what we have said more than once (Book I.
§§81 and 209, Book II. §69). The savages of North America had noright
to appropriate all that vast continent to themselves: and since they were
unable to inhabit the whole of those regions, other nations might with-
out injustice settle in some parts of them, provided they left the natives
a sufﬁciency of land. If the pastoral Arabs would carefully cultivate the
soil, a less space might be sufﬁcient for them. Nevertheless, no other
§97. Indepen-
dent families
in a country.


chapter viii
311
nation has a right to narrow their boundaries, unless she be under an
absolute want of land. For, in short, they possess their country; they
make use of it after their manner; they reap from it an advantagesuitable
to their manner of life, respecting which, they have no laws to receive
from any one. In a case of pressing necessity, I think people might with-
out injustice settle in a part of that country, on teaching the Arabs the
means of rendering it, by the cultivation of the earth, sufﬁcient fortheir
own wants and those of the new inhabitants.
It may happen that a nation is contented with possessing only certain
places, or appropriating to itself certain rights, in a country that has not
an owner,—without being solicitous to take possession of the whole
country. In this case, another nation may take possession of what the
ﬁrsthas neglected; butthiscannotbedonewithoutallowingalltherights
acquired by the ﬁrst to subsist in their full and absolute independence.
In such cases it is proper that regulations should be made by treaty; and
this precaution is seldom neglected among civilised nations.
chapter viii
Rules with respect to Foreigners.
We have already treated (Book I. §213) of the inhabitants, or persons
who reside in a country where they are not citizens. We shall here treat
only of those foreigners who pass through or sojourn in a country,either
on business, or merely as travellers. The relation that subsists between
them and the society in which they now live,—the objects of their jour-
ney and of their temporary residence,—the duties of humanity,—the
rights, the interest, and the safety of the state which harbours them,—
the rights of that to which they belong,—all these prin-<172>ciples,
combined and applied according to cases and circumstances, serve to
determine the conduct that ought to be observed towards them, and to
point out our right and our duty with respect to them. But the intention
of this chapter is not so much to shew what humanity and justicerequire
towards foreigners, as to establish the rules of the law of nations on this
§98. Posses-
sion of certain
places only,
or of certain
rights, in a
vacant country.
§99. General
idea of the
conduct the
state ought
to observe
towards
foreigners.

312
book ii: nations in relation to other states
subject,—rules tending to secure the rights of all parties, and to prevent
the repose of nations being disturbed by the quarrels of individuals.
Since the lord of the territory may, whenever he thinks proper,forbid
its being entered (§94), he has no doubt a power to annex what condi-
tions he pleases to the permission to enter. This, as we have already said,
is a consequence of the right of domain. Can it be necessary to add, that
the owner of the territory ought in this instance to respect the duties of
humanity? The case is the same with all rights whatever: the proprietor
may use them at his discretion; and, in so doing, he does not injure any
person: but if he would be free from guilt, and keep his consciencepure,
he will never use them but in such manner as is most conformable to his
duty. We speak here in general of the rights which belong to the lord of
the country, reserving for the following chapter the examination of the
cases in which he cannot refuse an entrance into his territory; and we
shall see in Chap. X. how his duty towards all mankind obliges him on
other occasions to allow a free passage through, and a residence in, his
state.
If the sovereign annexes any particular condition to the permission
to enter his territories, he ought to have measures taken to make for-
eigners acquainted with it, when they present themselves on thefrontier.
There are states, such as China, and Japan, into which all foreigners are
forbid to penetrate without an express permission: but in Europe the
access is every where free to every person who is not an enemy of the
state, except, in some countries, to vagabonds and outcasts.
But even in those countries which every foreigner may freely enter,
the sovereign is supposed to allow him access only upon this tacit con-
dition, that he be subject to the laws,—I mean the general laws made to
maintain good order, and which have no relation to the title of citizen,
or of subject of the state. The public safety, the rights of the nation and
of the prince, necessarily require this condition; and the foreignertacitly
submits to it, as soon as he enters the country, as he cannot presumethat
he has access upon any other footing. The sovereignty is the right to
command in the whole country; and the laws are not simply conﬁned
to regulating the conduct of the citizens towards each other, but also
§100. Entering
the territory.
§101. Foreign-
ers are subject
to the laws.
chapter viii
313
determine what is to be observed by all orders of people throughout the
whole extent of the state.
In virtue of this submission, foreigners who commit faults, are to be
punished according to the laws of the country. The object of punish-
ment is to cause the laws to be respected, and to maintain order and
safety. <173>
For the same reason, disputes that may arise between foreigners, or
between a foreigner and a citizen, are to be determined by the judge of
the place, and according to the laws of the place. And as the dispute
properly arises from the refusal of the defendant, who maintains that he
is not bound to perform what is required of him, it follows from the
same principle, that every defendant ought to be prosecuted before his
own judge, who alone has a right to condemn him, and compel him to
the performance. The Swiss have wisely made this rule one of thearticles
of their alliance, in order to prevent the quarrels that might arise from
abuses that were formerly too frequent in relation to this subject. The
defendant’s judge is the judge of the place where that defendant has his
settled abode, or the judge of the place where the defendant is, when
any sudden difﬁculty arises, provided it does not relate to an estate in
land, or to a right annexed to such an estate. In this last case, as property
of that kind is to be held according to the laws of the country where it
is situated, and as the right of granting possession is vested in the ruler
of the country,—disputes relating to such property can only be decided
in the state on which it depends.
We have already shewn (§84) how the jurisdiction of a nation ought
to be respected by other sovereigns, and in what cases alone they may
interfere in the causes of their subjects in foreign countries.
The sovereign ought not to grant an entrance into his state for the
purpose of drawing foreigners into a snare: as soon as he admits them,
heengagestoprotectthemashisownsubjects,andtoaffordthemperfect
security, as far as depends on him. Accordingly we see that every sov-
ereign who has given an asylum to a foreigner, considers himself no less
offended by an injury done to the latter, than he would be by an act of
violence committed on his own subject. Hospitality was in greathonour
§102. And
punishable
according to
the laws.
§103. Who is
the judge of
their disputes.
§104. Protec-
tion due to
foreigners.


314
book ii: nations in relation to other states
among the ancients, and even amongbarbarousnations,suchastheGer-
mans. Those savage nations who treated strangers ill, that Scythian tribe
who sacriﬁced them to Diana,* were universally held in abhorrence;and
Grotius justly says† that their extreme ferocity excluded them from the
great society of mankind. All other nations had a right to unite their
forces in order to chastise them.
From a sense of gratitude for the protection granted to him, and the
other advantages he enjoys, the foreigner ought not to content himself
with barely respecting the laws of the country; he ought to assist it upon
occasion, and contribute to its defence, as far as is consistent with his
duty as citizen of another state. We shall see elsewhere what he can and
ought to do, when the country is engaged in a war. But there is nothing
to hinder him from defending it against pirates or robbers, against the
ravages of an inundation, or the devastations of ﬁre. Can he pretend to
<174> live under the protection of a state, to participate in a variety of
advantages that it affords, and yet make no exertion for its defence, but
remain an unconcerned spectator of the dangers to which the citizens
are exposed?
He cannot indeed be subjectto thoseburdensthathaveonlyarelation
to the quality of citizens; but he ought to bear his share of all the others.
Being exempted from serving in the militia, and from paying thosetaxes
destined for the support of the rights of the nation, hewill paytheduties
imposed upon provisions, merchandise, &c. and, in a word, every thing
that has only a relation to his residence in the country, or to the affairs
which brought him thither.
The citizen or the subject of a state who absents himself for a time
without any intention to abandon the society of which he is a member,
does not lose his privilege by his absence: he preserves his rights, and
remains bound by the same obligations. Being received in a foreign
country, in virtue of the natural society, the communication, and com-
merce, which nations are obliged to cultivate with each other (Prelim.
* The Taurians. See Grotius de Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap. xx. §xl. n. 7.
† Ibid.
§105. Their
duties.
§106. To what
burdens they
are subject.
§107.
Foreigners
continue
members of
their own
nation.


chapter viii
315
§§11 and 12; Book II. §21), he ought to be considered there as a member
of his own nation, and treated as such.
The state, which ought to respect the rights of other nations, and in
general those of all mankind, cannot arrogate to herself any power over
the person of a foreigner, who, though he has entered her territory, has
not become her subject. The foreigner cannot pretend to enjoy the lib-
erty of living in the country without respecting the laws: if he violates
them, he is punishable as a disturber of the public peace, and guilty of
a crime against the society in which he lives: but he is not obliged to
submit, like the subjects, to all the commands of the sovereign: and if
such things are required of him as he is unwilling to perform, he may
quit the country. He is free at all times to leave it; nor have we a right
to detain him, except for a time, and for very particular reasons, as, for
instance, an apprehension, in war time, lest such foreigner, acquainted
with the state of the country and of the fortiﬁed places, should com-
municate his knowledge to the enemy. From the voyages of the Dutch
to the East Indies, we learn that the kings of Corea forcibly detain for-
eigners who are ship-wrecked on their coast; and Bodinus assures us,*
that a custom so contrary to the law of nations was practised in his time
in Aethiopia, and even in Muscovy. This is at once a violation of the
rights of individuals, and of those of the state to which they belong.
Things have been greatly changedinRussia;asinglereign—thatof Peter
the Great—has placed that vast empire in the rank of civilised nations.
The property of an individual does not cease to belong to him on
account of his being in a foreign country; it still constitutes a part of the
aggregate wealth of his nation (§81). Any power, <175> therefore,which
the lord of the territory might claim over the property of a foreigner,
would be equally derogatory to the rights of the individual owner, and
to those of the nation of which he is a member.
Since the foreigner still continues to be a citizen of his own country,
and a member of his own nation (§107), the property he leaves at his
death in a foreign country ought naturally to devolve to those who are
his heirs according to the laws of the state of which he is a member. But,
* In his Republic, book i. chap. vi.
§108. The
state has no
right over the
person of a
foreigner;
§109. nor over
his property.
§110. Who are
the heirs of a
foreigner.


316
book ii: nations in relation to other states
notwithstanding this general rule, his immovable effects are to be dis-
posed of according to the laws of the country where they are situated
(see §103).
As the right of making a will, or of disposing of his fortune in case
of death, is a right resulting from property, it cannot, without injustice,
be taken from a foreigner. The foreigner therefore, by natural right, has
the liberty of making a will. But it is asked by what laws he is obliged
to regulate himself either in the form of his testament or in the disposal
of his property? 1. As to the form or solemnities appointed to settle the
validity of a will, it appears that the testator ought to observe those that
are established in the country where he makes it, unless it be otherwise
ordained by the laws of the state of which he is a member; in which case
he will be obliged to observe the forms which they prescribe, if he would
validly dispose of the property he possesses in his own country. I speak
here of a will which is to be opened in the place where the person dies:
for if a traveller makes his will, and sends it home under seal, it is the
same thing as if it had been written at home; and in this case it is subject
to the laws of his own country. 2. As to the bequests themselves, wehave
already observed that those which relate to immovables ought to be con-
formabletothelawsof thecountrywherethoseimmovablesaresituated.
The foreign testator cannot dispose of the goods, movable or immov-
able, which he possesses in his own country, otherwise than in a manner
conformable to the laws of that country.Butastomovablegoods,specie,
and other effects which he possesses elsewhere, which he has with him,
or which follow his person, we ought to distinguish between the local
laws whose effect cannot extend beyond the territory, and those laws
which peculiarly affect the character of citizen. The foreignerremaining
a citizen of his own country, is still bound by those last-mentionedlaws,
wherever he happens to be, and is obliged to conform to them in the
disposal of his personal property, and all his movables whatsoever. The
laws of this kind made in the country where he resides at the time, but
of which he is not a citizen, are not obligatory with respecttohim.Thus,
a man who makes his will and dies in a foreign country, cannot deprive
his widow of the part of his movable effects assigned to that widow by
the laws of his own country. A Genevan, obliged by the law of Geneva
§111. Will of
a foreigner.


chapter viii
317
to leave a dividend of his personal property to his brothersorhiscousins,
if they be his next heirs, cannot deprive them of it by making his <176>
will in a foreign country, while he continues a citizen of Geneva: but a
foreigner dying at Geneva is not obliged, in this respect, to conform to
the laws of the republic. The case is quite otherwise with respect to local
laws: they regulate what may be done in the territory, and do not extend
beyond it. The testator is no longer subject to them when he is out of
the territory; and they do not affect that part of his property which is
also out of it. The foreigner is obliged to observe those laws in the coun-
try where he makes his will, with respect to the goods he possesses there.
Thus, an inhabitant of Neufchatel, to whom entails are forbidden in his
own country with respect to the property he possessesthere,freelymakes
an entail of the estate he possesses out of the jurisdiction of the country,
if he dies in a place where entails are allowed; and a foreigner making a
will at Neufchatel cannot make an entail of even the movable property
he possesses there,—unless indeed we may suppose that his movable
property is excepted by the spirit of the law.
What we have established in the three preceding sections is sufﬁcient
to shew with how little justice the crown, in some states, lays claim to
the effects left there by a foreigner at his death. This practice is founded
on what is called Escheatage, by which foreigners are excluded from all
inheritances in the state, either of the property of a citizen or that of an
alien, and consequently cannot be appointed heirs by will, nor receive
any legacy. Grotius justly observes that this law has descended to usfrom
those ages when foreigners were almost considered as enemies.* Even
after the Romans were become a very polite and learned people, they
could not accustom themselves to consider foreigners as men entitled to
any right in common with them. “Those nations,” says Pomponius the
civilian,23 “with whom we have neither friendship, nor hospitality, nor
alliance, are not therefore our enemies: yet if any thing belonging to us
falls into their hands, it becomes their property; our free citizensbecome
* De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap. vi. §14.
23. Titus Pomponius Atticus, ca. 110–32 b.c., Roman nobleman and patron of
letters, close friend of Cicero.
§112.
Escheatage.

318
chapter xxiii
Of the Sea.
279. The sea, and its use, <xxxi>
125
280. Whether the sea can be possessed, and its
dominion appropriated,
125
281. Nobody has a right to appropriate to himself the
use of the open sea,
125
282. A nation attempting to exclude another, does her
an injury,
126
283. She even does an injury to all nations,
126
284. She may acquire an exclusive right by treaties,
126
285. but not by prescription and long use,
127
286. unless by virtue of a tacit agreement,
127
287. The sea near the coasts may become property,
127
288. Another reason for appropriating the sea bordering
on the coasts,
128
289. How far that possession may extend,
128
290. Shores and ports,
129
291. Bays and straits,
129
292. Straits in particular,
130
293. Right to wrecks,
130
294. A sea inclosed within the territories of a nation,
130
295. The parts of the sea possessed by a sovereign are
within his jurisdiction,
131


34
original contents
book ii
Of a Nation considered in her
Relation to other States.
chapter i
Of the common Duties of a Nation towards other
States, or the Ofﬁces of Humanity between Nations.
Sect. 1. Foundation of the common and mutual
duties of nations,
page 133
2. Ofﬁces of humanity, and their foundation,
134
3. General principle of all the mutual duties
of nations,
135
4. Duties of a nation for the preservation of others,
135
5. She is bound to assist a nation afﬂicted with famine
or any other calamity,
136
6. She is bound to contribute to the perfection of
other states,
136
7. but not by force,
137
8. The right to require the ofﬁces of humanity,
138
9. The right of judging whether they are to
be granted,
138
10. A nation is not to compel another to perform those
ofﬁces of which the refusal is no wrong,
138
11. Mutual love of nations,
138
12. Each nation is bound to cultivate the friendship
of others,
138
13. to perfect herself with a view to the advantage of
others, and to set them good examples,
139
14. to take care of their glory,
139
15. Difference of religion ought not to preclude the
ofﬁces of humanity,
139
16. Rule and measure of the ofﬁces of humanity,
<xxxii>
140
17. Particular limitation with respect to the prince,
141
18. No nation ought to injure others,
141
19. Offences,
142
20. Bad custom of the ancients,
143


original contents
35
chapter ii
Of the mutual Commerce between Nations.
Sect. 21. General obligation of nations to carry on
mutual commerce,
page 143
22. They are bound to favour trade,
144
23. Freedom of trade,
144
24. Right of trading, belonging to nations,
144
25. Each nation is sole judge of the propriety of
commerce on her own part,
144
26. Necessity of commercial treaties,
145
27. General rule concerning those treaties,
145
28. Duty of nations in making such treaties,
145
29. Perpetual or temporary treaties, or treaties revocable
at pleasure,
145
30. Nothing contrary to the tenor of a treaty can be
granted to a third party,
146
31. How far lawful to give up by treaty the liberty of
trading with other nations,
146
32. A nation may restrict her commerce in favour of
another nation,
146
33. A nation may appropriate to herself a particular
branch of trade,
147
34. Consuls,
147
chapter iii
Of the Dignity and Equality of Nations,—
of Titles,—and other Marks of Honour.
35. Dignity of nations or sovereign states,
149
36. Their equality,
149
37. Precedency,
149
38. The form of government is foreign to this question,
150
39. A state ought to retain her rank, notwithstanding
any changes in the form of her government,
150
40. Treaties and established customs are to be observed
in this respect,
150
41. Name and honours given by the nation to
her conductor,
151
42. Whether a sovereign may assume what title and
honours he pleases,
152
43. Right of other nations in that respect,
152

36
original contents
Sect. 44. Their duty,
page 152
45. How titles and honours may be secured,
153
46. We must conform to general custom, <xxxiii>
153
47. Mutual respect due by sovereigns to each other,
153
48. How a sovereign ought to maintain his dignity,
154
book ii: nations in relation to other states
slaves to them: and they are on the same terms with respect to us.”* We
cannot suppose that so wise a people retained such inhuman laws with
any other view than that of a necessary retaliation, as they could not
otherwise obtain satisfaction from barbarous nations with whom they
had no connection or treaties existing. Bodinus shews† that Escheatage
is derived from these worthy sources! It has been successively mitigated,
or even abolished in most civilised states. The emperor Frederic II. ﬁrst
abolished it by an edict, which permitted all foreigners dying within the
limits of the empire to dispose of their substance by will, or, if they died
intestate, to have their nearest relations for heirs.‡ But Bodinus complains
that this edict is but ill executed. Why does there still remain any vestige
of so barbarous <177> a law in Europe, which is now so enlightened
and so full of humanity? The law of nature cannot suffer it to be put in
practice, except by way of retaliation. This is the use made of it by the
king of Poland in his hereditary states. Escheatage is established in Sax-
ony: but the sovereign is so just and equitable, that he enforces it only
against those nations which subject the Saxons to a similar law.
The right of traite foraine (called in Latin jus detractuˆs) is more con-
formable to justice, and the mutual obligation of nations. We give this
name to the right by virtue of which the sovereign retains a moderate
portion of the property either of citizens or aliens which is sent out of
his territories to pass into the hands of foreigners. As the exportation of
that property is a loss to the state, she may fairly receive an equitable
compensation for it.
Every state has the liberty of granting or refusing to foreigners the
power of possessing lands or other immovable property within her ter-
ritory. If she grants them that privilege, all such property, possessed by
aliens, remains subject to the jurisdiction and laws of the country, and
to the same taxes as other property of the same kind. The authority of
the sovereign extends over the whole territory; and it would be absurd
to except some parts of it, on account of their being possessed by for-
* Digest [[of Justinian]], lib. xix. tit xv. De Captivis & Postlimin.
† His Republic, book i. chap. vi.
‡ Ibid.
§113. The
right of traite
foraine.
§114. Immov-
able property
possessed by
an alien.


chapter ix
319
eigners. If the sovereign does not permit aliens to possess immovable
property, nobody has a right to complain of such prohibition; for he
may have very good reasons for acting in this manner: and as foreigners
cannot claim any right in his territories (§79), they ought not to take it
amiss that he makes use of his power and of his rights in the manner
which he thinks most for the advantage of the state. And asthesovereign
may refuse to foreigners the privilege of possessing immovableproperty,
he is doubtless at liberty to forbear granting it except with certain con-
ditions annexed.
There exists no natural impediment to prevent foreigners from con-
tracting marriages in the state. But if these marriages are found preju-
dicial or dangerous to a nation, she has a right, and is even in dutybound
to prohibit them, or to subject to certain conditions the permission to
contract them: and as it belongs to the nation or to her sovereign to
determine what appears most conducive to the welfare of thestate,other
nations ought to acquiesce in the regulations which any sovereign state
has made on this head. Citizens are almost every-where forbid to marry
foreign wives of a different religion; and in many parts of Switzerland
a citizen cannot marry a foreign woman, unless he prove that she brings
him in marriage a certain sum ﬁxed by the law. <178>
chapter ix
Of the Rights retained by all Nations after
the Introduction of Domain and Property.
If an obligation, as we have before observed, gives a right to those things
without which it cannot be fulﬁlled, every absolute, necessary, and in-
dispensable obligation produces in this manner rights equally absolute,
necessary, and indefeasible. Nature imposes no obligations on men,
without giving them the means of fulﬁlling them. Theyhaveanabsolute
right to the necessary use of those means: nothing can deprive them of
that right, as nothing can dispense with their fulﬁlling their natural
obligations.
§115.
Marriages
of aliens.
§116. What
are the rights
of which men
cannot be
deprived.


320
book ii: nations in relation to other states
In the primitive state of communion, men had, without distinction,
a right to the use of every thing, as far as was necessary to the discharge
of their natural obligations. And as nothing could deprive them of this
right, the introduction of domain and property could not take place
without leaving to every man the necessary use of things,—that is tosay,
the use absolutely required for the fulﬁlment of his natural obligations.
We cannot then suppose the introduction to have taken place without
this tacit restriction, that every man should still preserve some right to
the things subjected to property, inthosecases,where,withoutthisright,
he would remain absolutely deprived of the necessary use of things of
this nature. This right is a necessary remnant of the primitive state of
communion.
Notwithstanding the domain of nations, therefore, each nation still
retains some right to what is possessed by others, in those cases where
she would ﬁnd herself deprived of the necessary use of certain things if
she were to be absolutely debarred from using them by the consideration
of their being other people’s property. We ought carefully toweighevery
circumstance in order to make a just application of this principle.
I say the same of the right of necessity. We thus call the right which
necessity alone gives to the performance of certain actions that are oth-
erwise unlawful, when, without these actions, it is impossible to fulﬁl an
indispensable obligation. But it is carefully to be noted, that, in such a
case, the obligation must really be an indispensable one, and the act in
question the only means of fulﬁlling that obligation. If either of these
conditions be wanting, the right of necessity does not exist on the oc-
casion. We may see these subjects discussed in treatises on the law of
nature, and particularly in that of Mr. Wolf. I conﬁne myself here to a
brief summary of those principles whose aid is necessary to us in de-
veloping the rights of nations. <179>
The earth was designed to feed its inhabitants; and he who is in want
of every thing is not obliged to starve because all property is vested in
others. When, therefore, a nation is in absolute want of provisions, she
may compel her neighbours, who have more than they want for them-
selves, to supply her with a share of them at a fair price: she may even
take it by force, if they will not sell it. Extreme necessity revives the
§117. Right
still remaining
from the prim-
itive state of
communion.
§118. Right
retained by
each nation
over the prop-
erty others.
§119. Right
of necessity.
§120. Right
of procuring
provisions
by force.


chapter ix
321
primitive communion, the abolition of which ought to deprive no per-
son of the necessariesof life(§117).Thesamerightbelongstoindividuals
when a foreign nation refuses them a just assistance. Captain Bontekoe,
a Dutchman, having lost his vessel at sea, escaped in his boat with a part
of his crew, and landed on an Indian coast, where the barbarous inhab-
itantsrefusinghimprovisions,theDutchobtainedthemswordinhand.*
In the same manner, if a nation has a pressing want of the ships,
waggons, horses, oreven thepersonallabourof foreigners,shemaymake
use of them either by free consent or by force, provided that the pro-
prietors be not under the same necessity. But as she has no more right
to these things than necessity gives her, she ought to pay for the use she
makes of them, if she has the means of paying. The practice of Europe
is conformable to this maxim. In cases of necessity, a nation sometimes
presses foreign vessels which happen to be in her ports; but she pays a
compensation for the services performed by them.
Let us say a few words on a more singular case, since authors have
treated of it,—a case in which at present people are never reduced to
employ force. A nation cannot preserve and perpetuate itself except by
propagation. A nation of men has therefore a right to procure women,
who are absolutely necessary to its preservation: and if its neighbours,
who have a redundancy of females, refuse to give some of them in mar-
riage to those men, the latter may justly have recourse to force. We have
a famous example of this in the rape of the Sabine women.† But though
a nation is allowed to procure for itself, even by force of arms, the liberty
of obtaining women in marriage, no woman in particular can be con-
strained in her choice, nor become, by right, the wife of a man who
carries her off by force;—a circumstance which has not been attended
to by those who have decided, without restriction, that the Romans did
not commit an act of injustice on that occasion.‡ It is true, that the
Sabine women submitted to their fate with a good grace; and when their
nation took up arms to avenge them, it sufﬁciently appeared from the
* Bontekoe’s voyage, in the Voyages of the Dutch to the East-Indies.
† Livy, book i.
‡ Wolﬁi Jus Gent. §341.
§121. Right of
making use of
the things that
belong to
others.
§122. Right
of carrying off
women.


322
book ii: nations in relation to other states
ardor with which those women rushed between the combatants, that
they willingly acknowledged the Romans for their lawful husbands.
We may further add, that if the Romans, as many pretend, were orig-
inally only a band of robbers united under Romulus, they did not form
a true nation, or a legitimate state: the neighbour-<180>ing nations had
a just right to refuse them women; and the lawof nature,whichapproves
no civil society but such as is legitimate, did not require them to furnish
that society of vagabonds and robbers with the means of perpetuating
itself: much less did it authorise the latter to procure those means by
force. In the same manner, nonationwasobligedtofurnishtheAmazons
with males. That nation of women, if it ever existed, put itself, by its
own fault, out of a condition to supportitself withoutforeignassistance.
The right of passage is also a remnant of the primitive state of com-
munion, in which the entire earth was common to all mankind, and the
passage was every-where free to each individual according to his neces-
sities. Nobody can be entirely deprived of this right (§117); but the ex-
ercise of it is limited by the introduction of domain and property: since
they have been introduced, we cannot exert that right without paying
due regard to the private rights of others. The effect of property is to
give the proprietor’s advantage a preference over that of all others.
When, therefore, the owner of a territory thinks proper to refuse you
admission into it, you must, in order to enter it in spite of him, have
some reason more cogent than all his reasons to the contrary. Such is the
right of necessity: this authorises an act on your part, which on other
occasions would be unlawful, viz. an infringement of the right of do-
main. When a real necessity obliges you to enter into the territory of
others,—for instance, if you cannot otherwise escape from imminent
danger, or if you have no other passage for procuring the means of sub-
sistence, or those of satisfying some other indispensable obligation,—
you may force a passage when it is unjustly refused. But if an equal ne-
cessity obliges the proprietor to refuse you entrance, he refuses it justly;
and his right is paramount to yours. Thus a vessel driven by stress of
weather has a right to enter, even by force, into a foreign port. But if
that vessel is infected with the plague, the owner of the port may ﬁre
upon it and beat it off, without any violation either of justice, or even
of charity, which, in such a case, ought doubtless to begin at home.
§123. Right
of passage;


chapter ix
323
The right of passagethroughacountrywouldinmostcasesbeuseless,
without that of procuring necessaries at a fair price: and we have already
shewn (§120) that in case of necessity it is lawful to take provisions even
by force.
In speaking of exile and banishment, we have observed (Book I.
§§229–231) that every man has a right to dwell some-where upon earth.
What we have shewn with respect to individuals, may be applied to
whole nations. If a people are driven from the place of their abode, they
have a right to seek a retreat: the nation to which they make application
ought then to grant them a place of habitation, at least for a time, if she
has not very important reasons for a refusal. But if the countryinhabited
by this nation is scarcely sufﬁcient for herself, she is under no obligation
to allow a band of foreigners to settle in it for ever: she <181> may even
dismiss them at once, if it be not convenient to her to grant them a
permanent settlement. As they have the resource of seeking an estab-
lishment elsewhere, they cannot claim any authority from the right of
necessity, to stay in spite of the owners of the country. But it isnecessary,
in short, that these fugitives should ﬁnd a retreat; and if every body re-
jects them, they will be justiﬁable in making a settlement in the ﬁrst
country where they ﬁnd land enough for themselves, without depriving
the inhabitants of what is sufﬁcient for them. But, even inthiscase,their
necessity gives them only the right of habitation; and they are bound to
submit to all the conditions, not absolutely intolerable, which may be
imposed on them by the master of the country,—such as paying him
tribute, becoming his subjects, or at least living under his protection,
and, in certain respects, depending on him. This right, as well as the two
preceding, is a remnant of the primitive state of communion.
We have been occasionally obliged to anticipate the subject of the
present chapter in order to follow the order of the different subjects that
presented themselves. Thus, in speaking of the open sea, we have re-
marked (Book I. §281) that those things, the use of which is inexhaust-
ible, cannot fall under the domain or property of any one; because, in
that free and independent state in which nature has producedthem,they
may be equally useful to all men. And as to those things even, which in
other respects are subject to domain,—if their use is inexhaustible, they
remain common with respect to that use. Thus a river may be subject
§124. and of
procuring
necessaries.
§125. Right
of dwelling
in a foreign
country.
§126. Things,
of which
the use is
inexhaustible.

324
book ii: nations in relation to other states
both to domain and empire; but in quality of running water it remains
common,—that is to say, the owner of the river cannot hinder any one
from drinking and drawing water out of it. Thus the sea, even in those
parts that are held in possession, being sufﬁcient for the navigation of
all mankind, he who has the domain cannot refuse a passage through it
to any vessel from which he has nothing to fear. But it may happen, by
accident, that this inexhaustible use of the thing may be justly refused
by the owner, when people cannot take advantage of it without incom-
moding him or doing him a prejudice. For instance, if you cannotcome
to my river for water without passing over my land and damaging the
crop it bears, I may for that reason debar you from the inexhaustible use
of the running water: in which case, it is but through accident you are
deprived of it. This leads us to speak of another right which has a great
connection with that just mentioned, and is even derived from it; that
is the right of innocent use.
We callinnocentuse, orinnocentadvantage, thatwhichmaybederived
from a thing without causing either loss or inconvenience to the pro-
prietor; and the right of innocent use is the right we have to that advan-
tage or use which may be made of things belonging to another, without
causing him either loss or inconvenience. I have said that this right is
derived from the right to things of which the use is inexhaustible. In
fact, a thing that <182> may be useful to any one without loss or incon-
venience to the owner, is, in this respect, inexhaustible in the use; and
that is the reason why the law of nature still allows all men a right to it
notwithstanding the introduction of domain andproperty.Nature,who
designs her gifts for the common advantage of mankind, does not allow
us to prevent the application of those gifts to an useful purpose which
they may be made to serve without any prejudice to the proprietor, and
without any diminution of the utility and advantages he is capable of
deriving from his rights.
This right of innocent use is not a perfect right like that of necessity;
for it belongs to the owner to judge whether the use we wish to make of
a thing that belongs to him will not be attended with damage or incon-
venience. If others should presume to decide on the occasion, and, in
case of refusal, to compel the proprietor, he would be no longer master
§127. Right of
innocent use.
§128. Nature
of this right
in general;


chapter ix
325
of his own property. It may frequently happen that the person who
wishes to derive advantage from a thing shall deem the use of it perfectly
innocent, though it is not so in fact: and if, in such case, he attempts to
force the proprietor, he exposes himself to the risk of committing an act
of injustice; nay he actually commits one, since he infringes the owner’s
right to judge of what is proper to be done on the occasion. In all cases,
therefore, which admit of any doubt, we have only an imperfect right
to the innocent use of things that belong to others.
But when the innocence of the use is evident, and absolutely indu-
bitable, the refusal is an injury. For, in addition to a manifest violation
of the rights of the party by whom that innocent use is required, such
refusal is moreover a testimony of an injurious disposition of hatred or
contempt for him. To refuse a merchant-ship the liberty of passing
through a strait, to ﬁshermen that of drying their nets on the sea-shore
or of watering at a river, is an evident infringement of therighttheyhave
to the innocent use of things in those cases. But in every case, if we are
not pressed by necessity, we may ask the owner his reasons fortherefusal;
and if he gives none, we may consider him as an unjust man, or an
enemy, with whom we are to act according to the rules of prudence. In
general we should regulate our sentiments and conduct towards him,
according to the greater or lesser weight of the reasons on which he acts.
All nations do therefore still retain a general right to the innocent use
of things that are under the domain of any one individual nation. But,
in the particular application of this right, it is the nation in whom the
property is vested, that is to determine whether the use which others
wish to make of what belongs to her be really innocent: and if she gives
them a denial, she ought to allege her reasons; as she must not deprive
others of their right from mere caprice. All this is founded in justice: for
it must be remembered that the innocent use of things is not compre-
hendedinthedomainortheexclusiveproperty.Thedo-<183>maingives
only the right of judging, in particular cases, whether the use be really
innocent. Now he who judges ought to have his reasons; and he should
mention them, if he would have us think that he forms any judgment,
and not that he acts from caprice or ill-nature. All this, I say, is founded
in justice. In the next chapter we shall see the line of conduct which a
§129. and in
cases not
doubtful.
§130. Exercise
of this right
between
nations.


326
book ii: nations in relation to other states
nation is, by her duty to other nations, bound to observe in the exercise
of her rights.
chapter x
How a Nation is to use her Right of Domain, in
order to discharge her Duties towards other Nations,
with respect to the Innocent Use of Things.
Since the law of nations treats as well of the duties of states as of their
rights, it is not sufﬁcient that we have explained, on the subject of in-
nocent use, what all nations have a right to require from the proprietor:
we are now to consider what inﬂuence his duties to others ought to have
on the proprietor’s conduct. As it belongs to him to judge whether the
use be really innocent, and not productive of any detriment or incon-
venience to himself, he ought not to give a refusal unless it be grounded
upon real and substantial reasons: this is a maxim of equity: he ought
not even to stop at triﬂes,—a slight loss, or any little inconvenience:
humanityforbidsthis;andthemutuallovewhichmenowetoeachother,
requires greater sacriﬁces. Itwouldcertainlybetoogreatadeviationfrom
that universal benevolence which ought to unite the human race, to re-
fuse a considerable advantage to an individual, or to a whole nation,
whenever the grant of it might happen to be productive of the most
triﬂing loss or the slightest inconvenience to ourselves. In this respect,
therefore, a nation ought on all occasions to regulate her conduct by
reasons proportioned to the advantages and necessities of others, and to
reckon as nothing a small expense or a supportable inconvenience,when
great good will thence result to another nation. But she is under no ob-
ligation to incur heavy expenses or embarrassments, for the sake of fur-
nishing others with the use of any thing, when such use is neither nec-
essary nor of any great utility to them. The sacriﬁce we here require is
not contrary to the interests of the nation:—it is natural to think that
the others will behave in the same manner in return; and how great the
advantages that will result to all states from such a line of conduct!
§131. General
duty of the
proprietor.


chapter x
327
The introduction of property cannot be supposed to have deprived
nations of the general right of traversing the earth for the purposes of
mutual intercourse, of carrying on commerce with each other, and for
other just reasons. It is only on particular occasions when the owner of
a country thinks it would be prejudicial or dangerous to allow a passage
through it, that he ought to refuse <184> permission to pass. He is there-
fore bound to grant a passage for lawful purposes, whenever he can do
it without inconvenience to himself. And he cannot lawfully annex bur-
thensome conditions to a permission which he is obliged to grant, and
which he cannot refuse if he wishes to discharge his duty, and not abuse
his right of property. The count of Lupfen having improperly stopped
some merchandise in Alsace, and complaints being made on the subject
to the emperor Sigismund who was then at the council of Constance,24
that prince assembled the electors, princes, and deputies of towns, to
examine the affair. The opinion of the burgrave of Nuremberg deserves
to be mentioned: “God,” said he, “has created heaven for himself and
his saints, and has given the earth to mankind, intending it for the ad-
vantage of the poor as well as of the rich. The roads are for their use,
and God has not subjected them to any taxes.” Hecondemnedthecount
of Lupfen to restore the merchandise, and to pay costs and damages,
because he could not justify his seizure by any peculiar right. The em-
peror approved this opinion, and passed sentence accordingly.*
But if any apprehension of danger arise from the grant of liberty to
pass through a country, the state has a right to require sureties: the party
who wishes to pass cannot refuse them, a passage being only so far due
to him as it is attended with no inconvenience.
In like manner, a passage ought also to be granted for merchandise:
and as this is in general productive of no inconvenience, to refuse it
without just reason, is injuring a nation, and endeavouring to deprive
her of the means of carrying on a trade with other states. If this passage
occasions any inconvenience, any expense for the preservation of canals
* Stettler, vol. i. p. 114.—Tschudi, vol. ii. pp. 27, 28.
24. Council of Constance, 1414–18.
§132. Inno-
cent passage.
§133. Sureties
may be
required.
§134. Passage
of merchandise.


328
book ii: nations in relation to other states
and highways, we may exact a compensation for it by toll duties (Book
I. §103).
In explaining the effects of domain we have said above (§§64 and100)
that the owner of the territory may forbid the entrance into it, or permit
it on such conditions as he thinks proper. We were then treating of his
external right,—that right which foreigners are bound to respect. But
now that we are considering the matter in another view, and as it relates
to his duties and to his internal right, we may venture to assert that he
cannot, without particular and important reasons, refuse permission,ei-
ther to pass through or reside in the country, to foreigners who desire it
for lawful purposes. For, their passage or their residence being in this
case an innocent advantage, the law of nature does not give him a right
to refuse it: and though other nations and other men in general are
obliged to submit to his judgment (§§128 and 130), he does not the less
offend against his duty, if he refuses without sufﬁcient reason: he then
acts without any true right; he only abuses his external right. He cannot
therefore, without some particular and cogent reason, refuse the liberty
of residence to a <185> foreigner who comes into the country with the
hope of recovering his health, or for the sake of acquiring instruction
in the schools and academies. A difference in religion is not a sufﬁcient
reason to exclude him, provided he do not engage in controversial dis-
putes with a view to disseminate his tenets: for that difference does not
deprive him of the rights of humanity.
We have seen (§125) how the right of necessity may in certain cases
authorise a people, who are driven from the place of their residence, to
settle in the territory of another nation. Every state ought, doubtless, to
grant to so unfortunate a people every aid and assistance which she can
bestow without being wanting to herself: but to grant them an estab-
lishment in the territories of the nation, is a very delicate step, the con-
sequences of which should be maturely considered by the conductor of
the state. The emperors Probus and Valens25 experienced the evil effects
of their conduct in having admitted into the territories of the empire
25. Marcus Aurelius Probus, Roman emperor, r. a.d. 276–282; Flavius Julius Va-
lens, Roman emperor, r. a.d. 364–78.
§135. Resi-
dence in the
country.
§136. How
we are to act
towards for-
eigners who
desire a
perpetual
residence.


chapter x
329
numerous bands of Gepidae, Vandals, Goths, and other barbarians.* If
the sovereign ﬁnds that such a step would be attended with too great an
inconvenience or danger, he has a right to refuse an establishment to
those fugitive people, or to adopt, on their admission, every precaution
that prudence can dictate to him. One of the safest will be, not topermit
those foreigners to reside together in the same part of the country, there
to keep up the form of a separate nation. Men who have not been able
to defend their own country, cannot pretend to any right to establish
themselves in the territory of another, in order to maintain themselves
there as a nation in a body.† The sovereign who harbours them may
therefore disperse them, and distribute them into the towns and prov-
inces that are in want of inhabitants. In this manner his charity will turn
to his own advantage, to the increase of his power, and to the greater
beneﬁt of thestate. Whata differenceisobservableinBrandenburgsince
the settlement of the French refugees! The great elector, Frederic Wil-
liam,26 offered an asylum to those unfortunate people; he provided for
their expenses on the road, and with truly regal muniﬁcence established
them in his states; by which conduct that beneﬁcentandgenerousprince
merited the title of a wise and able politician.
When, by the laws or the custom of a state, certain actions are gen-
erally permitted to foreigners, as, for instance, travelling freely through
the country without any express permission, marrying there, buying or
selling merchandise, hunting, ﬁshing, &c. we cannot exclude any one
nation from the beneﬁt of the general permission, without doing her an
injury, unless there be <186> some particular and lawful reason for re-
fusing to that nation what is granted indiscriminately to others. The
* Vopiscus, Prob. c. xviii.—Ammian. Marcell. lib. xxxi. [[Roman History]]—So-
crat. Hist. Eccles. lib. iv. c. 28.
† Caesar replied to the Tenchtheri and Usipetes, who wanted to retain possession
of the territories they had seized, that it was not just for them to invade the territories
of others, since they had not been able to defend their own.—Neque verum esse, qui
suos ﬁnes tueri non potuerint, alienos occupare. [[“It was not probable that they who
were not able to defend their own territories, should get possession of those of
others.” IV.8 (not chapter 6 as Vattel writes).]] De Bello Gallico, lib. iv. cap. vi.
26. Friedrich Wilhelm, elector of Brandenburg, r. 1640–88.
§137. Right
accruing from
a general
permission.

330
book ii: nations in relation to other states
question here, it is to be observed, only relates to those actions which
are productive of innocent advantage: and as the nation allows them to
foreigners without distinction, she, by the very nature of that general
permission, affords a sufﬁcient proof that shedeemstheminnocentwith
respect to herself; which amounts to a declaration that foreigners have a
right to them (§127): the innocence of such acts is manifested by the
confession of the state; and the refusal of an advantage that is manifestly
innocent, is an injury (§129). Besides, to attempt without any reason to
lay one nation under a prohibition where an indiscriminate permission
is enjoyed by all others, is an injurious distinction, since it can only pro-
ceed from hatred or contempt. If there be any particular and well-
founded reason for the exception, the advantage resulting from the act
in question can no longer be deemed an innocent one with respect to
the excepted nation; consequently no injury is done to them. The state
may also, by way of punishment, except from the general permission a
people who have given her just cause of complaint.
As to rights of this nature granted to one or more nations for partic-
ular reasons, they are conferred on them as favours, either by treaty, or
through gratitude for some particular service: those to whom the same
rights are refused cannot consider themselves as offended. The nation
does not esteem theadvantage accruingfromthoseactstobeaninnocent
one, since she does not indiscriminately allow them to all nations: and
she may confer on whom she pleases any rights over her own property,
without affording just grounds to any body else, either for uttering a
complaint, or forming pretensions to the same favour.
Humanity is not conﬁned to the bare grant of a permission to foreign
nations to make an innocent use of what belongs to us: it moreover
requires that we should even facilitate to them the means of deriving
advantage from it, so far as we can do this without injury to ourselves.
Thus it becomes a well-regulated state to promote the general establish-
ment of inns where travellers may procure lodging and food at a fair
price,—to watch over their safety,—and to see that they be treated with
equity and humanity. A polite nation should give the kindest reception
to foreigners, receive them with politeness, and on every occasion shew
a disposition to oblige them. By these means every citizen, while he dis-
§138. A right
granted as a
favour.
§139. The
nation ought to
be courteous.
chapter xi
331
charges his duty to mankind in general, will at the same time render
essential services to his country. Glory is the certain reward of virtue;
and the good-will which is gained by an amiable character, is often pro-
ductive of consequences highly important to the state. No nation is en-
titled to greater praise in this respect than the French: foreigners no-
where meet a reception more agreeable, or better calculated to prevent
their regretting the immense sums they annually spend at Paris. <187>
chapter xi
Of Usucaption and Prescription among Nations.
Let us conclude what relates to domain and property with an exami-
nation of a celebrated question on which the learned are much divided.
It is asked whether usucaption and prescription can take place between
independent nations and states?
Usucaption is the acquisition of domain founded on a long posses-
sion, uninterruptedandundisputed,—thatistosay,anacquisitionsolely
proved by this possession. Wolf deﬁnes it, an acquisition of domain
founded on a presumed desertion. His deﬁnition explains the manner
in which a long and peaceable possession may serve to establish the ac-
quisition of domain. Modestinus,27 Digest. lib. 3. de Usurp. & Usucap.
says, in conformity to the principles of the Roman law, that usucaption
is the acquisition of domain by possession continued during a certain
period prescribed by law. These three deﬁnitions are by no means in-
compatible with each other; and it is easy to reconcile them by setting
aside what relates to the civil law in the last of the three. In the ﬁrst of
them, we have endeavoured clearly to express the idea commonlyafﬁxed
to the term usucaption.
Prescription is the exclusion of all pretensions to a right,—an exclu-
sion founded on the length of time during which that right has been
neglected; or, according to Wolf’s deﬁnition, it is the loss of an inherent
27. Herennius Modestinus, ca. a.d. 250, jurist and signiﬁcant contributor to the
Corpus Juris Civilis.
§140. Deﬁni-
tion of usu-
caption and
prescription.


332
book ii: nations in relation to other states
right by virtue of a presumed consent. This deﬁnition, too, is just; that
is, it explains how a right may be forfeited by long neglect; and it agrees
with the nominal deﬁnition we give of the term, prescription, in which
we conﬁne ourselves to the meaning usually annexed to the word. As to
the rest, the term usucaption is but little used in French; and the word
prescription implies, in that language, every thing expressed by the Latin
terms usucapio and praescriptio: wherefore we shall make useof theword
prescription wherever we have not particular reasons for employing the
other.
Now, to decide the question we have proposed, we must ﬁrst see
whether usucaption and prescription are derived from the law of nature.
Many illustrious authors have asserted and proved them to be so.*
Though in this treatise we frequentlysupposethereaderacquaintedwith
the law of nature, it is proper in this place to establish the decision,since
the affair is disputed.
Nature has not herself established a private property over any of her
gifts, and particularly over land: she only approves its establishment, for
the advantage of the human race. On this <188> ground, then, it would
be absurd to suppose, that, after the introduction of domain and prop-
erty, the law of nature can secure to a proprietor any right capable of
introducing disorder into human society. Such would be the right of
entirely neglecting a thing that belongs to him,—of leaving it during a
long space of time, under all the appearances of a thing utterly aban-
doned or not belonging to him,—and of coming at length to wrest it
from a bona-ﬁde possessor, who has perhaps dearly purchased his title
to it,—who has received it as an inheritance from his progenitors, or as
a portion with his wife,—and who might have made other acquisitions,
had he been able to discover that the one in question was neither solid
nor lawful. Far from giving such a right, the law of nature lays an in-
junction on the proprietor to take care of his property, and imposes on
him an obligation to make known his rights, that others may not be led
into error: it is on these conditions alone that she approves of the prop-
* See Grotius de Jure Belli & Pacis, lib. ii. cap. iv.—Puffendorf, Jus Nat. & Gent.
lib. iv. cap. xii.—and especially Wolﬁus [[Wolff]], Jus Nat. part iii. cap. vii.
§141. Usu-
caption and
prescription
derived from
the law of
nature.


chapter xi
333
erty vested in him, and secures him in the possession. If he has neglected
it for such a length of time that he cannot now be admitted to reclaim
it without endangering the rights of others, the law of nature will no
longer allow him to revive and assert his claims. We must not therefore
conceive the right of private property to be a right of so extensive and
imprescriptible a nature, that the proprietor may, at the risk of every
inconvenience thence resulting to human society, absolutely neglect it
for a length of time, and afterwards reclaim it, according to his caprice.
With what other view than that of the peace, the safety, and the advan-
tage of human society, does the law of nature ordain that all men should
respect the right of private property in him who makes use of it? For
the same reason therefore, the same law requires that every proprietor,
who for a long time and withoutany justreasonneglectshisright,should
be presumed to have entirely renounced and abandoned it. This is what
forms the absolute presumption (juris & de jure) of itsabandonment,—
a presumption, upon which another person is legally entitled to appro-
priate to himself the thing so abandoned. The absolute presumption
does not here signify a conjecture of the secret intentions of the pro-
prietor, but a maxim which the law of nature ordains should be consid-
ered as true and invariable,—and this with a view of maintaining peace
and order among men. Such presumption therefore confers a title as
ﬁrm and just as that of property itself, and established and supported
by the same reasons. The bona-ﬁde possessor, resting his title on a pre-
sumption of this kind, has then a right which is approved by the law
of nature; and that law, which requires that the rights of each individ-
ual should be stable and certain, does not allow any man to disturb him
in his possession.
The right of usucaption properly signiﬁes,thatthebona-ﬁde possessor
is not obliged to suffer his right of property to be disputed after a long-
continued and peaceable possession on his part: he proves that right by
the very circumstance of possession, and sets up the plea of prescription
in bar to the claims of the pretended <189> proprietor. Nothing can be
more equitable than this rule. If the claimant were permitted to prove
his property, he might happen to bring proofs very convincing indeed
in appearance, but, in fact, deriving all their force only from the loss or


334
book ii: nations in relation to other states
destruction of some document or deed which would have proved how
he had either lost or transferred his right. Would it be reasonable that
he should be allowed to call in question the rights of the possessor,when
by his own fault he has suffered matters to proceed to such a state, that
there would be danger of mistaking the truth? If it be necessary that one
of the two should be exposed to lose his property, it is just it should be
the party who is in fault.
It is true, that if the bona-ﬁde possessor should discover with perfect
certainty, that the claimant is the real proprietor, and has never aban-
doned his right, he is bound in conscience, and by the internalprinciples
of justice, to make restitution of whatever accession of wealth he has
derived from the property of the claimant. But this estimation is not
easily made; and it depends on circumstances.
As prescription cannot be grounded on any but an absolute or lawful
presumption, it has no foundation, if the proprietor has not really ne-
glected his right. This condition implies three particulars: 1, that the
proprietor cannot allege an invincible ignorance, either on his own part,
or on that of the persons from whom he derives his right;—2, that he
cannot justify his silence by lawful and substantial reasons;—3, that he
has neglected his right, or kept silence during a considerable number of
years: for the negligence of a few years, being incapable of producing
confusion, and rendering doubtful the respective rights of the parties,
is not sufﬁcient to found or authorise a presumption of relinquishment.
It is impossible to determine by the law of nature the number of years
required to found a prescription: this depends on the nature of theprop-
erty disputed, and the circumstances of the case.
What we have remarked in the preceding section, relates to ordinary
prescription. There is another called immemorial, because it is founded
onimmemorialpossession,—thatis,onapossession,theoriginof which
is unknown, or so deeply involved in obscurity, as to allow no possibility
of proving whether the possessor has really derived his right from the
original proprietor, or received the possession from another. This im-
memorial prescription secures the possessor’s right, beyond the power
of recovery: for it affords a legal presumption that he is the proprietor,
as long as the adverse party fails to adduce substantial reasons in support
§142. What
foundation is
required for
ordinary
prescription.
§143. Imme-
morial pre-
scription.


chapter xi
335
of his claim: and, indeed, whence could these reasons be derived, since
the origin of the possession is lost in the obscurity of time? It oughteven
to secure the possessor against every pretension contrary to his right.
What would be the case were it permitted to call in question a right
acknowledged time immemorial, when the means of proving it were
destroyed by time? Immemorial possession therefore is an irrefragable
title, and immemorial prescription admits of no exception: both are
founded on a pre-<190>sumption which the law of nature directs us to
receive as an incontestable truth.
In cases of ordinary prescription, the same argument cannot be used
against a claimant who alleges just reasons for his silence, as the impos-
sibility of speaking, or a well-founded fear, &c. because there is then no
longer any room for a presumption that he has abandoned his right. It
is not his fault if people have thought themselves authorised to form
such a presumption; nor ought he to suffer in consequence: he cannot
therefore be debarred the liberty of clearly proving his property. This
method of defence in bar of prescription has been often employed
against princes whose formidable power had long silenced the feeblevic-
tims of their usurpations.
It is also very evident that we cannot plead prescription in opposition
to a proprietor who, being for the present unable to prosecute his right,
conﬁnes himself to a notiﬁcation, by any token whatever, sufﬁcient to
shew that it is not his intention to abandon it. Protests answer this pur-
pose. With sovereigns it is usual to retain the title and arms of a sover-
eignty or a province, as an evidence that they do not relinquish their
claims to it.
Every proprietor, who expressly commits or omits certainactswhich
he cannot commit or omit without renouncing his right, sufﬁciently
indicates by such commission or omission that it is not his intention
to preserve it, unless, by an express reservation, he declare the contrary.
We are undoubtedly authorised to consider as true what he sufﬁciently
manifests on occasions where he ought to declare the truth: conse-
quently, we may lawfully presume that he abandons his right; and if
he would afterwards resume it, we can plead prescription in bar to his
claim.
§144.
Claimant
alleging
reasons for
his silence.
§145. Propri-
etor sufﬁciently
shewing that
he does not
mean to aban-
don his right.
§146.
Prescription
founded on
the actions of
the proprietor.

336
book ii: nations in relation to other states
After having shewn that usucaption and prescription are founded in
the law of nature, it is easy to prove that they are equally a part of the
law of nations, and ought to take place between different states. For the
law of nations is but the law of nature applied to nations in a manner
suitable to the parties concerned (Prelim. §6). And so far is the nature
of the parties from affording them an exemption in the case, that usu-
caption and prescription are much more necessary between sovereign
states than between individuals. Their quarrels are of much greatercon-
sequence; their disputes are usually terminated only by bloody wars; and
consequently the peace and happiness of mankind much more power-
fully requirethatpossessiononthepartof sovereignsshouldnotbeeasily
disturbed,—and that, if it has for a considerable length of time contin-
ued uncontested, it should be deemed just and indisputable. Were we
allowed to recur to antiquity on every occasion, there are few sovereigns
who could enjoy their rights in security, and there would be no peace to
be hoped for on earth.
It must however be confessed, that, between nations, the rights of
usucaption and prescription are often more difﬁcult in theirapplication,
so far as they are founded on a presumption <191> drawn from long
silence. Nobody is ignorant how dangerous it commonly is for a weak
state even to hint a claim to the possessions of a powerful monarch. In
such a case, therefore, it is not easy to deduce from long silence a legal
presumption of abandonment. To this we may add, that, as the ruler of
the society has usually no power to alienate what belongs to the state,
his silence, even though sufﬁcient to afford a presumption of abandon-
ment on his own part, cannot impair the national right or that of his
successors. The question then will be, whether the nation has neglected
to supply the omission caused by the silence of her ruler, or has par-
ticipated in it by a tacit approbation.
But there are other principles that establish the use and force of pre-
scription between nations. The tranquillity of the people, the safety of
states, the happiness of the human race, do not allow that the posses-
sions, empire, and other rights of nations should remain uncertain,sub-
ject to dispute, and ever ready to occasion bloody wars. Betweennations
therefore it becomes necessary to admit prescription founded on length
§147. Usu-
caption and
prescription
take place
between
nations.
§148. More
difﬁcult,
between na-
tions, to found
them on a
presumptive
desertion.
§149. Other
principles that
enforce
prescription.


chapter xi
337
of time, as a valid and incontestable title. If any nation has kept silence
through fear, and as it were through necessity, the loss of her right is a
misfortune which she ought patiently to bear, since she could not avoid
it: and why should she not submit to this as well as to have her towns
and provinces taken from her by an unjust conqueror, and to be forced
to cede them to him by treaty? It is however only in cases of long-
continued, undisputed, and uninterrupted possession, that prescription
is established on these grounds, because it is necessary that affairsshould
some time or other be brought to a conclusion, and settled on a ﬁrm and
solid foundation. But the case is different with a possession of only a few
years’ continuance, during which theparty whoserightsareinvadedmay
from prudential reasons ﬁnd it expedient to keep silence, without at the
same time affording room to accuse him of suffering things to become
uncertain, and of renewing quarrels without end.
As to immemorial prescription, what we have said respecting it (§143)
is sufﬁcient to convince every one that it ought necessarily to take place
between nations.
Usucaptionandprescriptionbeingsonecessarytothetranquillityand
happiness of human society, it is justly presumed that all nations have
consented to admit the lawful and reasonable use of them, with a view
to the general advantage, and even to the private interest of each indi-
vidual nation.
Prescription of many years’ standing, as well as usucaption, is then
established by the voluntary law of nations (Prelim. §21).
Nay more, as by virtue of that law nations are, in all doubtful cases,
supposed to stand on a footing of equal right in treating with each other
(ibid.), prescription, when founded on long undisputed possession,
ought to have its full effect between nations, without admitting any al-
legation of the possession being unjust, <192> unless the evidence to
prove it be very clear and convincingindeed.For,withoutsuchevidence,
every nation is to be considered as a bona-ﬁde possessor. Such is theright
that a sovereign state ought to allow to other states; but to herself she
should only allow the use of the internal and necessary right (Prelim.
§28). It is the bona-ﬁde possessor alone, whose prescription will stand
the test of conscience.
§150. Effects
of the volun-
tary law of
nations on
this subject.


338
book ii: nations in relation to other states
Since prescription is subject to so many difﬁculties, it would be very
proper that adjoining nations should by treaty adopt some rule on this
subject, particularly with respect to the number of years required to
found a lawful prescription, since this latter point cannot in general be
determined by the law of nature alone. If, in default of treaties, custom
has determined any thing in this matter, the nations between whom this
custom is in force, ought to conform to it (Prelim. §26).
chapter xii
Of Treaties of Alliance, and other public Treaties.
The subject of treaties is undoubtedly one of the most important that
the mutual relations and affairs of nations can present us with. Having
but too much reason to be convinced of the little dependence that is to
be placed on the natural obligations of bodies politic, and on the recip-
rocal duties imposed upon them by humanity,—the most prudent na-
tions endeavour to procure by treaties those succours and advantages
which the law of nature would insure to them, if it were not rendered
ineffectual by the pernicious counsels of a false policy.
A treaty, in Latin foedus, is a compact made with a view to the public
welfare by the superior power, either for perpetuity, or for a considerable
time.
The compacts which have temporary matters for their object are
called agreements, conventions, and pactions. They are accomplished
by one single act, and not by repeated acts. These compactsareperfected
in their execution once for all: treaties receive a successive execution
whose duration equals that of the treaty.
Public treaties can only be made by the superior powers,bysovereigns
who contract in the name of the state. Thus conventions made between
sovereigns respecting their own private affairs, and those between a sov-
ereign and a private person, are not public treaties.
The sovereign who possesses the full and absolute authority, has,
doubtless, a right to treat in the name of the state he represents; and his
engagements are binding on the whole nation. But all rulers of states
§151. Law of
treaties or of
custom in this
matter.
§152. Nature
of treaties.
§153.
Pactions,
agreements, or
conventions.
§154. By
whom treaties
are made.


chapter xii
339
have not a power to make public treaties by their own authority alone:
some are obliged to take the advice of a senate, or of the representatives
of the nation. It is from the <193> fundamental laws of each state that
we must learn where resides the authority that is capable of contracting
with validity in the name of the state.
Notwithstanding our assertion above, that public treaties are made
only by the superior powers, treaties of that nature may nevertheless be
entered into by princes or communities who have a right to contract
them, either by the concession of the sovereign, or by the fundamental
laws of the state, by particular reservations, or by custom. Thus the
princes and free cities of Germany, though dependent on the emperor
and the empire, have the right of forming alliances with foreignpowers.
The constitutions of the empire give them, in this as in many other
respects, the rights of sovereignty. Some cities of Switzerland, though
subject to a prince, have made alliances with the cantons: thepermission
or toleration of the sovereign has given birth to such treaties, and long
custom has established the right to contract them.
As a state that has put herself under the protection of another, has
not on that account forfeited her character of sovereignty(BookI. §192),
she may make treaties and contract alliances, unless she has, in the treaty
of protection, expressly renounced that right. But she continues for ever
after bound by this treaty of protection, so that she cannot enter into
any engagements contrary to it,—that is to say, engagements which vi-
olate the express conditions of the protection, or that are in their own
nature repugnant to every treaty of protection. Thus the protected state
cannot promise assistance to the enemies of her protector, nor grant
them a passage.
Sovereigns treat with each other through the medium of agents or
proxies who are invested with sufﬁcient powers for the purpose, and are
commonly called plenipotentiaries. To their ofﬁce we may apply all the
rules of natural law which respect things done by commission. The
rights of the proxy are determined by the instructionsthataregivenhim:
he must not deviate from them; but every promise which he makes in
the terms of his commission, and within the extent of his powers, is
binding on his constituent.
§155. Whether
a state under
protection may
make treaties.
§156. Treaties
concluded by
proxies or pleni-
potentiaries.


340
book ii: nations in relation to other states
At present, in order to avoid all danger and difﬁculty, princes reserve
to themselves the power of ratifying what has been concluded upon in
their name by their ministers. The plenipotentiary commission is but a
procuration cum libera. If this commission were to have its full effect,
they could not be too circumspect in giving it. But as princes cannot
otherwise than by forceof armsbecompelledtofulﬁltheirengagements,
it is customary to place no dependence on their treaties, till they have
agreed to and ratiﬁed them. Thus, as every agreement made by the min-
ister remains invalid till sanctioned by the prince’s ratiﬁcation, there is
less danger in vesting him with unlimited powers. But before a prince
can honourably refuse to ratify a compact made in virtue of such plen-
ipotentiary commission, he <194> should be able to allege strong and
substantial reasons, and, in particular, to prove that his minister has de-
viated from his instructions.
A treaty is valid if there be no defect in the manner in which it has
beenconcluded:andforthispurposenothingmorecanberequired,than
a sufﬁcient power in the contracting parties, and their mutual consent
sufﬁciently declared.
An injury cannot then render a treaty invalid. He who enters into
engagements ought carefully to weigh every thing before he concludes
them; he may do what he pleases with his ownproperty,foregohisrights,
and renounce his advantages, as he thinks proper; the acceptor is not
obliged to inquire into his motives, and to estimate their due weight. If
we might recede from a treaty because we found ourselves injured by it,
there would be no stability in the contracts of nations. Civil laws may
set bounds to injury, and determine what degree of it shall be capable
of invalidating a contract. But sovereigns are subject to no superior
judge. How shall they be able to prove the injury to each other’s satis-
faction? Who shall determine the degree of it sufﬁcient to invalidate a
treaty? The peace and happiness of nations manifestly require that their
treaties should not depend on so vague and dangerous a plea of
invalidity.
A sovereign nevertheless is in conscience bound to pay a regard to
equity, and to observe it as much as possible, in all his treaties. And if it
happens that a treaty which he has concluded with upright intentions,
§157. Validity
of treaties.
§158. Injury
does not
render them
void.
§159. Duty of
nations in this
respect.


chapter xii
341
and without perceiving any unfairness in it, should eventually provedis-
advantageous to an ally, nothing can be more honourable, more praise-
worthy, more conformable to the reciprocal duties of nations, than to
relax the terms of such treaty as far as he can do it consistently with his
duty to himself, and without exposing himself to danger, or incurring
a considerable loss.
Though a simple injury, or some disadvantage in a treaty, be not suf-
ﬁcient to invalidate it, the case is not the same with thoseinconveniences
that would lead to the ruin of the nation. Since, in the formation of
every treaty, the contractingpartiesmustbevestedwithsufﬁcientpowers
for the purpose, a treaty pernicious to the state is null, and not at all
obligatory, as no conductor of a nation has the power to enter into en-
gagements to do such things as are capable of destroying the state, for
whose safety the government is intrusted to him. The nationitself,being
necessarily obliged to perform every thing required for its preservation
and safety (Book I. §16, &c.), cannot enter into engagements contrary
to its indispensable obligations. In the year 1506, the states-general of
the kingdom of France, assembled at Tours, engaged Louis XII.tobreak
the treaty he had concluded with the emperor Maximilian,28 and the
archduke Philip, his son, because that treaty was pernicious to the king-
dom. They also decided, that neither the treaty, nor the oath that had
accompanied it, could bebindingontheking,whohadnorightto<195>
alienate the property of the crown.* We have treated of this lattersource
of invalidity in the twenty-ﬁrst chapter of Book I.
For the same reason—the want of sufﬁcient powers—a treaty con-
cluded for an unjust or dishonest purpose is absolutely null and void,—
nobody having a right to engage to do things contrary to the law of
nature. Thus, an offensive alliance, made for the purpose of plundering
a nation from whom no injury has been received, may or rather ought
to be broken.
* See the French historians [[Choisy, Daniel, Me´zeray, Pineau-Duclos, and Velly]].
28. King Louis XII of France, r. 1498–1515; Emperor Maximilian I, r. 1508–19.
The treaty referred to was the Treaty of Trente, signed in October 1501 between Max-
imilian of Austria, the future emperor, who was then “king of the Romans,” and
Louis XII.
§160. Nullity
of treaties
which are
pernicious to
the state.
§161. Nullity
of treaties
made for an
unjust or
dishonest
purpose.

342
book ii: nations in relation to other states
Itis asked, whetheritbeallowabletocontractanalliancewithanation
that does not profess the true religion, and whether treaties made with
the enemies of the faith are valid? Grotius has treated this subject at
large:* and the discussion might have been necessary at a time when
party-rage still obscured those principles which it had long caused to be
forgotten: but we may venture to believe that it would be superﬂuous in
the present age. The law of nature alone regulates the treaties of nations:
the difference of religion is a thing absolutely foreign to them. Different
people treat with each other in quality of men, and not under the char-
acter of Christians, orof Mahommedans.Theircommonsafetyrequires
that they should be capable of treating with each other, and of treating
with security. Any religion that should in this case clash with the law of
nature, would, on the very face of it, wear the stamp of reprobation,
and could not pretend to derive its origin from the great author of na-
ture, who is ever steady, ever consistent with himself. But if the maxims
of a religion tend to establish it by violence, and to oppress all thosewho
will not embrace it, the law of nature forbids us to favour that religion,
or to contract any unnecessary alliances with its inhuman followers;and
the common safety of mankind invites them rather to enter into an al-
liance against such a people,—to repress such outrageous fanatics, who
disturb the public repose, and threaten all nations.
It is a settled point in natural law, that he who has made a promise to
any one, has conferred upon him a real right to require the thing prom-
ised,—and consequently, that the breach of a perfect promise is a vio-
lation of another person’s right, and as evidently an act of injustice, as
it would be to rob a man of his property. The tranquillity, thehappiness,
the security of the human race, wholly depend on justice,—on the ob-
ligation of paying a regard to the rights of others. The respect which
others pay to our rights of domain and property constitutes the security
of our actual possessions; the faith of promises is our security for things
that cannot be delivered or executed upon the spot. There would no
longer be any security, no longer any commerce between mankind, if
* De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap. xv. §8. et seq.
§162. Whether
an alliance
may be con-
tracted with
those who do
not profess the
true religion.
§163. Obli-
gation of
observing
treaties.
chapter xii
343
they did not think themselves obliged to keep faith with each other, and
to perform their promises. This obligation is then as necessary, as it is
natural and indubitable, between na-<196>tions that live together in a
state of nature, and acknowledge no superior upon earth, to maintain
order and peace in their society. Nations, therefore, and their conduc-
tors, ought inviolably to observe their promises and their treaties. This
great truth, though too often neglected in practice, is generallyacknowl-
edged by all nations:* the reproach of perﬁdy is esteemed by sovereigns
a most atrocious affront; yet he who does not observe a treaty, iscertainly
perﬁdious, since he violates his faith. On the contrary, nothing adds so
great a glory to a prince, and to the nation he governs, as the reputation
of an inviolable ﬁdelity in the performance of promises. By such hon-
ourable conduct, as much or even more than by her valour, the Swiss
nation has rendered herself respectable throughout Europe, and is de-
servedly courted by the greatest monarchs, who intrust their personal
safety to a body-guard of her citizens. The parliament of England has
more than once thanked the king for his ﬁdelity and zeal in succouring
the allies of his crown. This national magnanimity is the source of im-
mortal glory; it presents a ﬁrm basis on which nations may build their
conﬁdence; and thus it becomes an unfailing source of power and
splendor.
As the engagements of a treaty impose on the one hand a perfect
obligation, they produce on the other a perfect right. The breach of a
treaty is therefore a violation of the perfect right of the party withwhom
we have contracted; and this is an act of injustice against him.
A sovereign already bound by a treaty, cannot enter into others con-
trary to the ﬁrst. The things, respecting which he has entered into en-
gagements, are no longer at his disposal. If it happens that a posterior
treaty be found, in any particular point, to clash with one of more an-
cient date, the new treaty is null and void with respect to that point,
inasmuch as it tends to dispose of a thing that is no longer in the power
* Mahommed warmly recommended to his disciples the observance of treaties.
Ockley’s History of the Saracens, vol. i.
§164. The
violation of a
treaty is an act
of injustice.
§165. Treaties
cannot be
made, contrary
to those already
existing.


344
book ii: nations in relation to other states
of him who appears to dispose of it. (We are here to be understood as
speaking of treaties made with different powers.) If the prior treaty is
kept secret, it would be an act of consummate perﬁdy to conclude a
contrary one, which may be rendered void whenever occasion serves.
Nay, even to enter into engagements, which, from the eventual turn of
affairs, may chance at a future day to militate against the secret treaty,
and from that very circumstance to prove ineffectual and nugatory, is by
no means justiﬁable, unless we have the ability to make ample compen-
sation to our new ally: otherwise it would be practising a deception on
him, to promise him a thing without informing him that cases may pos-
sibly occur, which will not allow us to substantiate our promise. Theally
thus deceived is undoubtedly at liberty to renounce the treaty; but if he
chuses rather to adhere to it, it will hold good <197> with respect to all
the articles that do not clash with the prior treaty.
There is nothing to prevent a sovereign from entering into engage-
ments of the same nature with two or more nations, if he be able tofulﬁl
those several engagements to his different allies at the same time. For
instance, a commercial treaty with one nation does not deprive us of the
liberty of afterwards contracting similar engagements with other states,
unless we have, in the former treaty, bound ourselves by a promise not
to grant the same advantages to any other nation. We may in the same
manner promise to assist two different allies with troops, if we are able
to furnish them, or if there is no probability that both will haveoccasion
for them at the same time.
If nevertheless the contrary happens, the more ancient ally is entitled
to a preference: for the engagement was pure and absolute with respect
to him; whereas we could not contract with the more recentally,without
a reservation of the rights of the former. Such reservation is founded in
justice, and is tacitly understood, even if not expressly made.
The justice of the cause is another ground of preference betweentwo
allies. We ought even torefuseassistancetotheonewhosecauseisunjust,
whether he be at war with one of our allies, or with another state: to
assist him on such an occasion, would in the event be the same thing as
if we had contracted an alliance for an unjust purpose; which we are not
allowed to do (§161). No one can be validly engaged to supportinjustice.
§166. How
treaties may
be concluded
with several
nations with
the same view.
§167. The
more ancient
ally entitled to
a preference.
§168. We owe
no assistance
in an unjust
war.


chapter xii
345
Grotius divides treaties into two general classes,—ﬁrst, those which
turn merely on things to which the parties were already bound by the law of
nature,—secondly, those by which they enter into further engagements.*By
the former we acquire a perfect right to things to which we before had
only an imperfect right, so that we may thenceforward demand as our
due what before we could only request as an ofﬁce of humanity. Such
treaties became very necessary between the nations of antiquity, who, as
we have already observed, did not think themselves bound to any duty
towards people who were not in the number of their allies. They are
useful even between the most polished nations, in order the better to
secure the succours they may expect,—to determine the measure and
degree of those succours, and to shew on what they have to depend,—
to regulate what cannot in general be determinedbythelawof nature,—
and thus to obviate all difﬁculties, by providing against the various in-
terpretations of that law. Finally, as no nation possesses inexhaustible
means of assistance, it is prudent to secure to ourselves a peculiar right
to that assistance which cannot be granted to all the world.
To this ﬁrst class belong all simple treaties of peace and friendship,
when the engagements which we thereby contract, make no <198> ad-
dition to those duties that men owe to each other as brethren, and as
members of the human society: such are those treaties that permit com-
merce, passage, &c.
If the assistance and ofﬁces that are due by virtue of such a treaty,
should on any occasionproveincompatiblewiththedutiesanationowes
to herself, or with what the sovereign owes to his own nation, the case
is tacitly and necessarily excepted in the treaty. For neither the nation
nor the sovereign could enter into an engagement to neglect the care of
their own safety or the safety of the state, in order to contribute to that
of their ally. If the sovereign, in order to preserve his own nation, has
occasion for the things he has promised in the treaty,—if, for instance,
he has engaged to furnish corn, and in a time of dearth he has scarcely
sufﬁcient for the subsistence of his subjects, he ought withouthesitation
to give a preference to his own nation: for it is only so far as he has it in
* De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap. xv. §5.
§169. General
division of
treaties.
1. Those that
relate to things
already due by
the law of
nature.
§170. Colli-
sion of these
treaties with
the duties
we owe to
ourselves.


346
book ii: nations in relation to other states
his power to give assistance to a foreign nation, that he naturally owes
such assistance; and it was upon that footing alone that he couldpromise
it in a treaty. Now it is not in his power to deprive his own nation of
the means of subsistence in order to assist another nation at their ex-
pense. Necessity here forms an exception, and he does not violate the
treaty, because he cannot fulﬁl it.
The treaties by which we simply engage not to do any evil to an ally,
to abstain, with respect to him, from all harm, offence, and injury, are
not necessary, and produce no new right, since every individual already
possesses a perfect natural right to be exempt from harm, injury, and real
offence. Such treaties, however, become very useful, and accidentally
necessary, among those barbarous nations who think they have a right
to act as they please towards foreigners. They are not wholly useless with
nations less savage, who, without so far divesting themselves of human-
ity, entertain a much less powerful sense of a natural obligation, than of
one which they have themselves contracted by solemnengagements:and
would to God that this manner of thinking were entirely conﬁned to
barbarians! We see too frequent effects of it among those who boast of
a perfection much superior to the law of nature. But the imputation of
perﬁdy is prejudicial to the rulers of nations, and thus becomes formi-
dable even to those who are little solicitous to merit the appellation of
virtuous men, and who feel no scruple in silencing the reproaches of
conscience.
Treaties by which we contract engagements that were not imposedon
us by the law of nature, are either equal or unequal.
Equal treaties are those in which the contracting parties promise the
same things, or things that are equivalent, or, ﬁnally, things that are eq-
uitably proportioned, so that the condition of the parties is equal. Such
is, for example, a defensive alliance, in which the parties reciprocally
stipulate for the same succours. Such is an offensive alliance, in which
it is agreed that each of <199> the allies shall furnish the same number
of vessels, the same number of troops, of cavalry and infantry, or an
equivalent in vessels, in troops, in artillery, or in money. Such is also a
league in which the quota of each of the allies is regulated in proportion
to the interest he takes or may have in the design of the league. Thus
§171. Treaties
in which we
barely promise
to do no injury.
§172. Treaties
concerning
things that are
not naturally
due.
Equal treaties.


chapter xii
347
the emperor and the king of England,29 in order to induce the states-
general of the United Provinces to accede to the treaty of Vienna of the
16th of March 1731, consented that the republic should only promise to
her allies the assistance of four thousand foot and a thousand horse,
though they engaged, in case of an attack upon the republic, to furnish
her, each, with eight thousand foot and four thousand horse. We are also
to place in the class of equal treaties those which stipulate that the allies
shall consider themselves as embarked in a common cause, and shall act
with all their strength. Notwithstanding a real inequality in their
strength, they are nevertheless willing in this instance to consider it as
equal.
Equal treaties may be subdivided into as many species as there are of
different transactions between sovereigns. Thus they treat of the con-
ditions of commerce, of their mutual defence, of associations in war, of
reciprocally granting each other a passage, or refusing it to the enemies
of their ally; they engage not to build fortresses in certain places, &c.
But it would be needless to enter into these particulars: generals are suf-
ﬁcient, and are easily applied to particular cases.
Nations being no less obliged than individuals to pay a regard to eq-
uity, they ought, as much aspossible,topreserveequalityintheirtreaties.
When, therefore, the parties are able reciprocally to afford each other
equal advantages, the law of nature requires that their treaties should be
equal, unless there exist some particular reason for deviating from that
equality,—such, for instance, as gratitude for a former beneﬁt,—the
hope of gaining the inviolable attachment of a nation,—some private
motive which renders one of the contracting parties particularlyanxious
to have the treaty concluded, &c. Nay, viewing the transaction in its
proper point of light, the consideration of that particularreasonrestores
to the treaty that equality which seems to be destroyed by the difference
of the things promised.
I see those pretended great politicians smile, who employ all their
subtilty in circumventing those with whom they treat, and in so man-
aging the conditions of the treaty, that all the advantage shall accrue to
29. Emperor Charles VI, r. 1711–40; King George II, r. 1727–60.
§173. Obli-
gation of
preserving
equality in
treaties.

348
book ii: nations in relation to other states
their masters. Far from blushing at a conduct so contrary to equity, to
rectitude, and natural honesty, they glory in it, and think themselves
entitled to the appellation of able negotiators. How long shall we con-
tinue to see men in public characters take a pride in practices that would
disgrace a private individual? The private man, if he is void of con-
science, laughs also at the rules of morality and justice; but he laughs in
secret: it would be dangerous and prejudicial to him <200> to make a
public mockery of them. Men in power more openly sacriﬁce honour
and honesty to present advantage: but, fortunately for mankind, it often
happens that such seeming advantage proves fatal to them; and even
between sovereigns, candour and rectitude are found to be the safest
policy. All the subtilties, all the tergiversations of a famous minister,30
on the occasion of a treaty in which Spain was deeply interested, turned
at length to his own confusion, and to the detriment of his master;while
England, by her good faith and generosity to her allies, gained immense
credit, and rose to the highest pitch of inﬂuence and respectability.
When people speak of equal treaties, they have commonly in their
minds a double idea of equality, viz. equality in the engagements, and
equality in the dignity of the contracting parties. It becomes therefore
necessary to remove all ambiguity; and for that purpose, we may make
a distinction between equal treaties and equal alliances. Equal treaties are
those in which there is an equality in the promises made, as we have
above explained (§172); and equal alliances, those in which equal treats
with equal, making no difference in the dignity of the contracting par-
ties, or, at least, admitting no too glaring superiority, but merely a pre-
eminence of honour and rank. Thus kings treat with the emperor on a
footing of equality, thoughtheydonothesitatetoallowhimprecedency;
thus great republics treat with kings on the same footing, notwithstand-
ing the pre-eminence which the former now-a-days yield to the latter.
Thus all true sovereigns ought to treat with the most powerfulmonarch,
since they are as really sovereigns, and as independent as himself. (See
§37 of this Book.)
30. Cardinal Richelieu, chief minister (1624–42) to King Louis XIII of France.
§174. Differ-
ence between
equal treaties
and equal
alliances.
